2σ n=1
q

(4.69)

where ‘const’ denotes terms independent of both w and σ 2 . Note that, as a function
of w, this is the Lq error function considered in Section 4.2.
4.12 (? ?) Consider the expected loss for regression problems under the Lq loss function
given by (4.40). Write down the condition that y(x) must satisfy to minimize E[Lq ].
Show that, for q = 1, this solution represents the conditional median, i.e., the function y(x) such that the probability mass for t < y(x) is the same as for t ⩾ y(x).
Also show that the minimum expected Lq loss for q → 0 is given by the conditional
mode, i.e., by the function y(x) being equal to the value of t that maximizes p(t|x)
for each x.

5
Single-layer
Networks:
Classification

In the previous chapter, we explored a class of regression models in which the output variables were linear functions of the model parameters and which can therefore
be expressed as simple neural networks having a single layer of weight and bias
parameters. We turn now to a discussion of classification problems, and in this chapter, we will focus on an analogous class of models that again can be expressed as
single-layer neural networks. These will allow us to introduce many of the key concepts of classification before dealing with more general deep neural networks in later
chapters.
The goal in classification is to take an input vector x ∈ RD and assign it to one
of K discrete classes Ck where k = 1, . . . , K. In the most common scenario, the
classes are taken to be disjoint, so that each input is assigned to one and only one
class. The input space is thereby divided into decision regions whose boundaries are
called decision boundaries or decision surfaces. In this chapter, we consider linear

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
C. M. Bishop, H. Bishop, Deep Learning, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-45468-4_5

131

132

5. SINGLE-LAYER NETWORKS: CLASSIFICATION

Section 5.2.4

models for classification, by which we mean that the decision surfaces are linear
functions of the input vector x and, hence, are defined by (D − 1)-dimensional
hyperplanes within the D-dimensional input space. Data sets whose classes can
be separated exactly by linear decision surfaces are said to be linearly separable.
Linear classification models can be applied to data sets that are not linearly separable,
although not all inputs will be correctly classified.
We can broadly identify three distinct approaches to solving classification problems. The simplest involves constructing a discriminant function that directly assigns
each vector x to a specific class. A more powerful approach, however, models the
conditional probability distributions p(Ck |x) in an inference stage and subsequently
uses these distributions to make optimal decisions. Separating inference and decision brings numerous benefits. There are two different approaches to determining
the conditional probabilities p(Ck |x). One technique is to model them directly, for
example by representing them as parametric models and then optimizing the parameters using a training set. This will be called a discriminative probabilistic model.
Alternatively, we can model the class-conditional densities p(x|Ck ), together with
the prior probabilities p(Ck ) for the classes, and then compute the required posterior
probabilities using Bayes’ theorem:
p(Ck |x) =

p(x|Ck )p(Ck )
.
p(x)

(5.1)

This will be called a generative probabilistic model because it offers the opportunity
to generate samples from each of the class-conditional densities p(x|Ck ). In this
chapter, we will discuss examples of all three approaches: discriminant functions,
generative probabilistic models, and discriminative probabilistic models.

5.1. Discriminant Functions
A discriminant is a function that takes an input vector x and assigns it to one of K
classes, denoted Ck . In this chapter, we will restrict attention to linear discriminants,
namely those for which the decision surfaces are hyperplanes. To simplify the discussion, we consider first two classes and then investigate the extension to K > 2
classes.

5.1.1

Two classes

The simplest representation of a linear discriminant function is obtained by taking a linear function of the input vector so that
y(x) = wT x + w0

(5.2)

where w is called a weight vector, and w0 is a bias (not to be confused with bias in
the statistical sense). An input vector x is assigned to class C1 if y(x) ⩾ 0 and to
class C2 otherwise. The corresponding decision boundary is therefore defined by the
relation y(x) = 0, which corresponds to a (D − 1)-dimensional hyperplane within

133

5.1. Discriminant Functions
Figure 5.1 Illustration of the geometry of
a linear discriminant function in two dimensions. The decision surface, shown in red,
is perpendicular to w, and its displacement
from the origin is controlled by the bias parameter w0 . Also, the signed orthogonal
distance of a general point x from the decision surface is given by y(x)/kwk.

x2

y>0
y=0
y<0

R1
R2

x
w

y(x)
kwk

x⊥
x1
−w0
kwk

the D-dimensional input space. Consider two points xA and xB both of which lie on
the decision surface. Because y(xA ) = y(xB ) = 0, we have wT (xA − xB ) = 0 and
hence the vector w is orthogonal to every vector lying within the decision surface,
and so w determines the orientation of the decision surface. Similarly, if x is a point
on the decision surface, then y(x) = 0, and so the normal distance from the origin
to the decision surface is given by
w0
wT x
=−
.
kwk
kwk

(5.3)

We therefore see that the bias parameter w0 determines the location of the decision
surface. These properties are illustrated for the case of D = 2 in Figure 5.1.
Furthermore, note that the value of y(x) gives a signed measure of the perpendicular distance r of the point x from the decision surface. To see this, consider an
arbitrary point x and let x⊥ be its orthogonal projection onto the decision surface,
so that
w
x = x⊥ + r
.
(5.4)
kwk

Multiplying both sides of this result by wT and adding w0 , and making use of y(x) =
wT x + w0 and y(x⊥ ) = wT x⊥ + w0 = 0, we have
r=

Section 4.1.1

y(x)
.
kwk

(5.5)

This result is illustrated in Figure 5.1.
As with linear regression models, it is sometimes convenient to use a more compact notation in which we introduce an additional dummy ‘input’ value x0 = 1 and
e = (w0 , w) and x
e = (x0 , x) so that
then define w
e Tx
e.
y(x) = w

(5.6)

134

5. SINGLE-LAYER NETWORKS: CLASSIFICATION

C3

C1
?
R1

R3

R1

C1

R2

?
C3

C1
R3

R2
C2

C2

not C1

C2

not C2

Figure 5.2 Attempting to construct a K-class discriminant from a set of two-class discriminant functions leads
to ambiguous regions, as shown in green. On the left is an example with two discriminant functions designed to
distinguish points in class Ck from points not in class Ck . On the right is an example involving three discriminant
functions each of which is used to separate a pair of classes Ck and Cj .

In this case, the decision surfaces are D-dimensional hyperplanes passing through
the origin of the (D + 1)-dimensional expanded input space.

5.1.2

Multiple classes

Now consider the extension of linear discriminant functions to K > 2 classes.
We might be tempted to build a K-class discriminant by combining a number of
two-class discriminant functions. However, this leads to some serious difficulties
(Duda and Hart, 1973), as we now show.
Consider a model with K − 1 classifiers, each of which solves a two-class problem of separating points in a particular class Ck from points not in that class. This
is known as a one-versus-the-rest classifier. The left-hand example in Figure 5.2
shows an example involving three classes where this approach leads to regions of
input space that are ambiguously classified.
An alternative is to introduce K(K − 1)/2 binary discriminant functions, one
for every possible pair of classes. This is known as a one-versus-one classifier. Each
point is then classified according to a majority vote amongst the discriminant functions. However, this too runs into the problem of ambiguous regions, as illustrated
in the right-hand diagram of Figure 5.2.
We can avoid these difficulties by considering a single K-class discriminant
comprising K linear functions of the form
yk (x) = wkT x + wk0

(5.7)

and then assigning a point x to class Ck if yk (x) > yj (x) for all j 6= k. The decision
boundary between class Ck and class Cj is therefore given by yk (x) = yj (x) and

5.1. Discriminant Functions
Figure 5.3

Illustration of the decision regions for a
multi-class linear discriminant, with the
decision boundaries shown in red. If
two points xA and xB both lie inside the
same decision region Rk , then any point
b that lies on the line connecting these
x
two points must also lie in Rk , and hence,
the decision region must be singly connected and convex.

135

Rj
Ri
Rk
xB
xA

b
x

hence corresponds to a (D − 1)-dimensional hyperplane defined by
(wk − wj )T x + (wk0 − wj 0 ) = 0.

(5.8)

This has the same form as the decision boundary for the two-class case discussed in
Section 5.1.1, and so analogous geometrical properties apply.
The decision regions of such a discriminant are always singly connected and
convex. To see this, consider two points xA and xB both of which lie inside decision
b that lies on the line connecting
region Rk , as illustrated in Figure 5.3. Any point x
xA and xB can be expressed in the form
b = λxA + (1 − λ)xB
x

(5.9)

where 0 ⩽ λ ⩽ 1. From the linearity of the discriminant functions, it follows that
yk (b
x) = λyk (xA ) + (1 − λ)yk (xB ).

Section 5.1.1

(5.10)

Because both xA and xB lie inside Rk , it follows that yk (xA ) > yj (xA ) and that
b also lies inside
yk (xB ) > yj (xB ), for all j 6= k, and hence yk (b
x) > yj (b
x), and so x
Rk . Thus, Rk is singly connected and convex.
Note that for two classes, we can either employ the formalism discussed here,
based on two discriminant functions y1 (x) and y2 (x), or else use the simpler but
essentially equivalent formulation based on a single discriminant function y(x).

5.1.3

1-of-K coding

For regression problems, the target variable t was simply the vector of real numbers whose values we wish to predict. In classification, there are various ways of
using target values to represent class labels. For two-class problems, the most convenient is the binary representation in which there is a single target variable t ∈ {0, 1}
such that t = 1 represents class C1 and t = 0 represents class C2 . We can interpret
the value of t as the probability that the class is C1 , with the probability values taking
only the extreme values of 0 and 1. For K > 2 classes, it is convenient to use a
1-of-K coding scheme, also known as the one-hot encoding scheme, in which t is
a vector of length K such that if the class is Cj , then all elements tk of t are zero

136

5. SINGLE-LAYER NETWORKS: CLASSIFICATION
except element tj , which takes the value 1. For instance, if we have K = 5 classes,
then a data point from class 2 would be given the target vector
t = (0, 1, 0, 0, 0)T .

(5.11)

Again, we can interpret the value of tk as the probability that the class is Ck in which
the probabilities take only the values 0 and 1.

5.1.4
Section 4.1.3

Exercise 5.1

Least squares for classification

With linear regression models, the minimization of a sum-of-squares error function leads to a simple closed-form solution for the parameter values. It is therefore
tempting to see if we can apply the same least-squares formalism to classification
problems. Consider a general classification problem with K classes and a 1-of-K
binary coding scheme for the target vector t. One justification for using least squares
in such a context is that it approximates the conditional expectation E[t|x] of the
target values given the input vector. For a binary coding scheme, this conditional expectation is given by the vector of posterior class probabilities. Unfortunately, these
probabilities are typically approximated rather poorly, and indeed the approximations can have values outside the range (0, 1). However, it is instructional to explore
these simple models and to understand how these limitations arise.
Each class Ck is described by its own linear model so that
yk (x) = wkT x + wk0

(5.12)

where k = 1, . . . , K. We can conveniently group these together using vector notation so that
f Tx
e
y(x) = W
(5.13)
f is a matrix whose kth column comprises the (D + 1)-dimensional vector
where W
e is the corresponding augmented input vector (1, xT )T with
e k = (wk0 , wkT )T and x
w
a dummy input x0 = 1. A new input x is then assigned to the class for which the
e is largest.
e kT x
output yk = w
f by minimizing a sum-of-squares
We now determine the parameter matrix W
error function. Consider a training data set {xn , tn } where n = 1, . . . , N , and
e
define a matrix T whose nth row is the vector tT
n , together with a matrix X whose
T
en . The sum-of-squares error function can then be written as
nth row is x
n
o
f = 1 Tr (X
eW
f − T)T (X
eW
f − T) .
ED (W)
2

(5.14)

f to zero and rearranging, we obtain the soluSetting the derivative with respect to W
f in the form
tion for W
f = (X
e T X)
e −1 X
e TT = X
e †T
W
Section 4.1.3

(5.15)

e † is the pseudo-inverse of the matrix X.
e We then obtain the discriminant
where X

5.1. Discriminant Functions
function in the form

 T
f Tx
e† x
e = TT X
e.
y(x) = W

137
