k x + ln g(λk ) + ln p(Ck )

(5.68)

and so again is a linear function of x.

5.4. Discriminative Classifiers
For the two-class classification problem, we have seen that the posterior probability of class C1 can be written as a logistic sigmoid acting on a linear function of
x, for a wide choice of class-conditional distributions p(x|Ck ) from the exponential
family. Similarly, for the multi-class case, the posterior probability of class Ck is
given by a softmax transformation of linear functions of x. For specific choices of
the class-conditional densities p(x|Ck ), we have used maximum likelihood to determine the parameters of the densities as well as the class priors p(Ck ) and then used
Bayes’ theorem to find the posterior class probabilities. This represents an example
of generative modelling, because we could take such a model and generate synthetic
data by drawing values of x from the marginal distribution p(x) or from any of the
class-conditional densities p(x|Ck ).
However, an alternative approach is to use the functional form of the generalized linear model explicitly and to determine its parameters directly by using maximum likelihood. In this direct approach, we maximize a likelihood function defined
through the conditional distribution p(Ck |x), which represents a form of discriminative probabilistic modelling. One advantage of the discriminative approach is that
there will typically be fewer learnable parameters to be determined, as we will see
shortly. It may also lead to improved predictive performance, particularly when the
assumed forms for the class-conditional densities represent a poor approximation to
the true distributions.

158

5. SINGLE-LAYER NETWORKS: CLASSIFICATION

5.4.1
Chapter 4

Activation functions

In linear regression, the model prediction y(x, w) is given by a linear function
of the parameters
y(x, w) = wT x + w0 ,
(5.69)
which gives a continuous-valued output in the range (−∞, ∞). For classification
problems, however, we wish to predict discrete class labels, or more generally posterior probabilities that lie in the range (0, 1). To achieve this, we consider a generalization of this model in which we transform the linear function of w and w0 using
a nonlinear function f ( · ) so that

y(x, w) = f wT w + w + 0 .
(5.70)
In the machine learning literature, f ( · ) is known as an activation function, whereas
its inverse is called a link function in the statistics literature. The decision surfaces
correspond to y(x) = constant, so that wT x = constant, and hence the decision
surfaces are linear functions of x, even if the function f (·) is nonlinear. For this
reason, the class of models described by (5.70) are called generalized linear models
(McCullagh and Nelder, 1989). However, in contrast to the models used for regression, they are no longer linear in the parameters due to the nonlinear function f (·).
This will lead to more complex analytical and computational properties than for
linear regression models. Nevertheless, these models are still relatively simple compared to the much more flexible nonlinear models that will be studied in subsequent
chapters.

5.4.2

Section 5.2

Section 6.1

Fixed basis functions

So far in this chapter, we have considered classification models that work directly with the original input vector x. However, all the algorithms are equally applicable if we first make a fixed nonlinear transformation of the inputs using a vector
of basis functions φ(x). The resulting decision boundaries will be linear in the feature space φ, and these correspond to nonlinear decision boundaries in the original x
space, as illustrated in Figure 5.15. Classes that are linearly separable in the feature
space φ(x) need not be linearly separable in the original observation space x.
Note that as in our discussion of linear models for regression, one of the basis
functions is typically set to a constant, say φ0 (x) = 1, so that the corresponding
parameter w0 plays the role of a bias.
For many problems of practical interest, there is significant overlap in x-space
between the class-conditional densities p(x|Ck ). This corresponds to posterior probabilities p(Ck |x), which, for at least some values of x, are not 0 or 1. In such cases,
the optimal solution is obtained by modelling the posterior probabilities accurately
and then applying standard decision theory. Note that nonlinear transformations
φ(x) cannot remove such a class overlap, although they can increase the level of
overlap or create an overlap where none existed in the original observation space.
However, suitable choices of nonlinearity can make the process of modelling the
posterior probabilities easier. However, such fixed basis function models have important limitations, and these will be resolved in later chapters by allowing the basis
functions themselves to adapt to the data.

159

5.4. Discriminative Classifiers

1
1
φ2

x2
0

0.5

−1
0
−1

0

x1

1

0

0.5

φ1

1

Figure 5.15 Illustration of the role of nonlinear basis functions in linear classification models. The left-hand
plot shows the original input space (x1 , x2 ) together with data points from two classes labelled red and blue.
Two ‘Gaussian’ basis functions φ1 (x) and φ2 (x) are defined in this space with centres shown by the green
crosses and with contours shown by the green circles. The right-hand plot shows the corresponding feature
space (φ1 , φ2 ) together with the linear decision boundary obtained given by a logistic regression model of the
form discussed in Section 5.4.3. This corresponds to a nonlinear decision boundary in the original input space,
shown by the black curve in the left-hand plot.

5.4.3

Logistic regression

We first consider the problem of two-class classification. In our discussion of
generative approaches in Section 5.3, we saw that under rather general assumptions,
the posterior probability of class C1 can be written as a logistic sigmoid acting on a
linear function of the feature vector φ so that

p(C1 |φ) = y(φ) = σ wT φ
(5.71)
with p(C2 |φ) = 1 − p(C1 |φ). Here σ(·) is the logistic sigmoid function defined by
(5.42). In the terminology of statistics, this model is known as logistic regression,
although it should be emphasized that this is a model for classification rather than
for continuous variable.
For an M -dimensional feature space φ, this model has M adjustable parameters.
By contrast, if we had fitted Gaussian class-conditional densities using maximum
likelihood, we would have used 2M parameters for the means and M (M + 1)/2
parameters for the (shared) covariance matrix. Together with the class prior p(C1 ),
this gives a total of M (M +5)/2+1 parameters, which grows quadratically with M ,
in contrast to the linear dependence on M of the number of parameters in logistic
regression. For large values of M , there is a clear advantage in working with the
logistic regression model directly.

160

5. SINGLE-LAYER NETWORKS: CLASSIFICATION

Exercise 5.18

We now use maximum likelihood to determine the parameters of the logistic
regression model. To do this, we will make use of the derivative of the logistic sigmoid function, which can conveniently be expressed in terms of the sigmoid function
itself:
dσ
= σ(1 − σ).
(5.72)
da
For a data set {φn , tn }, where φn = φ(xn ) and tn ∈ {0, 1}, with n = 1, . . . , N ,
the likelihood function can be written
p(t|w) =

N
Y
n=1

yntn {1 − yn }

1−tn

(5.73)

where t = (t1 , . . . , tN )T and yn = p(C1 |φn ). As usual, we can define an error
function by taking the negative logarithm of the likelihood, which gives the crossentropy error function:
E(w) = − ln p(t|w) = −

Exercise 5.19

N
X
n=1

{tn ln yn + (1 − tn ) ln(1 − yn )}

where yn = σ(an ) and an = wT φn . Taking the gradient of the error function with
respect to w, we obtain
∇E(w) =

Section 4.1.3

Chapter 7

(5.74)

N
X
n=1

(yn − tn )φn

(5.75)

where we have made use of (5.72). We see that the factor involving the derivative
of the logistic sigmoid has cancelled, leading to a simplified form for the gradient
of the log likelihood. In particular, the contribution to the gradient from data point
n is given by the ‘error’ yn − tn between the target value and the prediction of
the model times the basis function vector φn . Furthermore, comparison with (4.12)
shows that this takes precisely the same form as the gradient of the sum-of-squares
error function for the linear regression model.
The maximum likelihood solution corresponds to ∇E(w) = 0. However, from
(5.75) we see that this no longer corresponds to a set of linear equations, due to
the nonlinearity in y(·), and so this equation does not have a closed-form solution.
One approach to finding a maximum likelihood solution would be to use stochastic
gradient descent, in which ∇En is the nth term on the right-hand side of (5.75).
Stochastic gradient descent will be the principal approach to training the highly nonlinear neural networks discussed in later chapters. However, the maximum likelihood
equation is only ‘slightly’ nonlinear, and in fact the error function (5.74), in which the
model is defined by (5.71), is a convex function of the parameters, which allows the
error function to be minimized using a simple algorithm called iterative reweighted
least squares or IRLS (Bishop, 2006). However, this does not easily generalize to
more complex models such as deep neural networks.

5.4. Discriminative Classifiers

Exercise 5.20

Chapter 9

Note that maximum likelihood can exhibit severe over-fitting for data sets that
are linearly separable. This arises because the maximum likelihood solution occurs
when the hyperplane corresponding to σ = 0.5, equivalent to wT φ = 0, separates
the two classes and the magnitude of w goes to infinity. In this case, the logistic sigmoid function becomes infinitely steep in feature space, corresponding to a
Heaviside step function, so that every training point from each class k is assigned a
posterior probability p(Ck |x) = 1. Furthermore, there is typically a continuum of
such solutions because any separating hyperplane will give rise to the same posterior
probabilities at the training data points. Maximum likelihood provides no way to
favour one such solution over another, and which solution is found in practice will
depend on the choice of optimization algorithm and on the parameter initialization.
Note that the problem will arise even if the number of data points is large compared
with the number of parameters in the model, so long as the training data set is linearly separable. The singularity can be avoided by adding a regularization term to
the error function.

5.4.4
Section 5.3

161

Multi-class logistic regression

In our discussion of generative models for multi-class classification, we have
seen that, for a large class of distributions from the exponential family, the posterior
probabilities are given by a softmax transformation of linear functions of the feature
variables, so that
exp(ak )
p(Ck |φ) = yk (φ) = P
(5.76)
j exp(aj )
where the pre-activations ak are given by
ak = wkT φ.

Exercise 5.21

(5.77)

There we used maximum likelihood to determine separately the class-conditional
densities and the class priors and then found the corresponding posterior probabilities
using Bayes’ theorem, thereby implicitly determining the parameters {wk }. Here we
consider the use of maximum likelihood to determine the parameters {wk } of this
model directly. To do this, we will require the derivatives of yk with respect to all
the pre-activations aj . These are given by
∂yk
= yk (Ikj − yj )
∂aj

(5.78)

where Ikj are the elements of the identity matrix.
Next we write down the likelihood function. This is most easily done using
the 1-of-K coding scheme in which the target vector tn for a feature vector φn
belonging to class Ck is a binary vector with all elements zero except for element k,
which equals one. The likelihood function is then given by
p(T|w1 , . . . , wK ) =

N Y
K
Y
n=1 k=1

p(Ck |φn )

tnk

=

N Y
K
Y
n=1 k=1

tnk
ynk

(5.79)

162

5. SINGLE-LAYER NETWORKS: CLASSIFICATION
φM −1 (x)

yK (x, w)

...

Representation of a multi-class linear classification model as a neural network having a single layer
of connections. Each basis function is represented by a node,
with the solid node representing the ‘bias’ basis function φ0 ,
whereas each output y1 , . . . , yN is
also represented by a node. The
links between the nodes represent
the corresponding weight and bias
parameters.

...

Figure 5.16

φ1 (x)

y1 (x, w)

φ0 (x)

where ynk = yk (φn ), and T is an N × K matrix of target variables with elements
tnk . Taking the negative logarithm then gives
E(w1 , . . . , wK ) = − ln p(T|w1 , . . . , wK ) = −

Exercise 5.22

Section 5.4.6

tnk ln ynk ,

(5.80)

n=1 k=1

which is known as the cross-entropy error function for the multi-class classification
problem.
We now take the gradient of the error function with respect to one of the parameter vectors wj . Making use of the result (5.78) for the derivatives of the softmax
function, we obtain
∇wj E(w1 , . . . , wK ) =

Chapter 7

N X
K
X

N
X
n=1

(ynj − tnj ) φn

(5.81)

P
where we have made use of k tnk = 1. Again, we could optimize the parameters
through stochastic gradient descent.
Once again, we see the same form arising for the gradient as was found for the
sum-of-squares error function with the linear model and for the cross-entropy error
with the logistic regression model, namely the product of the error (ynj − tnj ) times
the basis function activation φn . These are examples of a more general result that
we will explore later.
Linear classification models can be represented as single-layer neural networks
as shown in Figure 5.16. If we consider the derivative of the error function with
respect to a weight wik , which links basis function φi (x) to output unit tk , we have
from (5.81)
N
∂E(w1 , . . . , wK ) X
=
(ynk − tnk ) φi (xn ).
(5.82)
∂wij
n=1
Comparing this with Figure 5.16, we see that, for each data point n this gradient
takes the form of the output of the basis function at the input end of the weight link
with the ‘error’ (ynk − tnk ) at the output end.

5.4. Discriminative Classifiers
Figure 5.17 Schematic example of a probability density p(θ) shown by the blue curve, given in this example
by a mixture of two Gaussians, along with its cumulative
distribution function f (a), shown by the red curve. Note
that the value of the blue curve at any point, such as
that indicated by the vertical green line, corresponds to
the slope of the red curve at the same point. Conversely,
the value of the red curve at this point corresponds to the
area under the blue curve indicated by the shaded green
region. In the stochastic threshold model, the class label
takes the value t = 1 if the value of a = wT φ exceeds
a threshold, otherwise it takes the value t = 0. This is
equivalent to an activation function given by the cumulative distribution function f (a).

163

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

0

1

2

3

4

5.4.5 Probit regression
We have seen that, for a broad range of class-conditional distributions described
by the exponential family, the resulting posterior class probabilities are given by a
logistic (or softmax) transformation acting on a linear function of the feature variables. However, not all choices of class-conditional density give rise to such a simple
form for the posterior probabilities, which suggests that it might be worth exploring
other types of discriminative probabilistic model. Consider the two-class case, again
remaining within the framework of generalized linear models, so that
p(t = 1|a) = f (a)

(5.83)

where a = wT φ, and f (·) is the activation function.
One way to motivate an alternative choice for the link function is to consider a
noisy threshold model, as follows. For each input φn , we evaluate an = wT φn and
then we set the target value according to
(
tn = 1, if an ⩾ θ,
(5.84)
tn = 0, otherwise.
If the value of θ is drawn from a probability density p(θ), then the corresponding
activation function will be given by the cumulative distribution function
Z a
f (a) =
p(θ) dθ
(5.85)
−∞

as illustrated in Figure 5.17.
As a specific example, suppose that the density p(θ) is given by a zero-mean,
unit-variance Gaussian. The corresponding cumulative distribution function is given
by
Z
a

Φ(a) =
−∞

N (θ|0, 1) dθ,

(5.86)

164

5. SINGLE-LAYER NETWORKS: CLASSIFICATION
which is known as the probit function. It has a sigmoidal shape and is compared
with the logistic sigmoid function in Figure 5.12. Note that the use of a Gaussian
distribution with general mean and variances does not change the model because this
is equivalent to a re-scaling of the linear coefficients w. Many numerical packages
can evaluate a closely related function defined by
Z a
2
exp(−θ 2 /2) dθ
(5.87)
erf(a) = √
π 0

Exercise 5.23

and known as the erf function or error function (not to be confused with the error
function of a machine learning model). It is related to the probit function by


1
1
1 + √ erf(a) .
Φ(a) =
(5.88)
2
2
The generalized linear model based on a probit activation function is known as probit
regression. We can determine the parameters of this model using maximum likelihood by a straightforward extension of the ideas discussed earlier. In practice, the
results found using probit regression tend to be like those of logistic regression.
One issue that can occur in practical applications is that of outliers, which can
arise for instance through errors in measuring the input vector x or through mislabelling of the target value t. Because such points can lie a long way to the wrong side
of the ideal decision boundary, they can seriously distort the classifier. The logistic
and probit regression models behave differently in this respect because the tails of
the logistic sigmoid decay asymptotically like exp(−x) for |x| → ∞, whereas for
the probit activation function, they decay like exp(−x2 ), and so the probit model
can be significantly more sensitive to outliers.

5.4.6

Canonical link functions

For the linear regression model with a Gaussian noise distribution, the error
function, corresponding to the negative log likelihood, is given by (4.11). If we
take the derivative with respect to the parameter vector w of the contribution to the
error function from a data point n, this takes the form of the ‘error’ yn − tn times the
feature vector φn , where yn = wT φn . Similarly, for the combination of the logisticsigmoid activation function and the cross-entropy error function (5.74) and for the
softmax activation function with the multi-class cross-entropy error function (5.80),
we again obtain this same simple form. We now show that this is a general result
of assuming a conditional distribution for the target variable from the exponential
family along with a corresponding choice for the activation function known as the
canonical link function.
We again make use of the restricted form (3.169) of exponential family distributions. Note that here we are applying the assumption of exponential family distribution to the target variable t, in contrast to Section 5.3.4 where we applied it to the
input vector x. We therefore consider conditional distributions of the target variable
of the form
 
 
t
1
ηt
g(η) exp
.
(5.89)
p(t|η, s) = h
s
s
s

5.4. Discriminative Classifiers

165

Using the same line of argument as led to the derivation of the result (3.172), we see
that the conditional mean of t, which we denote by y, is given by
y ≡ E[t|η] = −s

d
ln g(η).
dη

(5.90)

Thus, y and η must related, and we denote this relation through η = ψ(y).
Following Nelder and Wedderburn (1972), we define a generalized linear model
to be one for which y is a nonlinear function of a linear combination of the input (or
feature) variables so that
y = f (wT φ)
(5.91)
where f (·) is known as the activation function in the machine learning literature, and
f −1 (·) is known as the link function in statistics.
Now consider the log likelihood function for this model, which, as a function of
η, is given by
N
X


N 
X
η n tn
+ const
ln p(t|η, s) =
ln p(tn |η, s) =
ln g(ηn ) +
s
n=1
n=1

(5.92)

where we are assuming that all observations share a common scale parameter (which
corresponds to the noise variance for a Gaussian distribution, for instance) and so s
is independent of n. The derivative of the log likelihood with respect to the model
parameters w is then given by
∇w ln p(t|η, s) =
=


N 
X
d
tn dη n dy n
∇w a n
ln g(ηn ) +
dη n
s
dy n dan
n=1
N
X
1

s
n=1

{tn − yn } ψ 0 (yn )f 0 (an )φn

(5.93)

where an = wT φn , and we have used yn = f (an ) together with the result (5.90)
for E[t|η]. We now see that there is a considerable simplification if we choose a
particular form for the link function f −1 (y) given by
f −1 (y) = ψ(y),

(5.94)

which gives f (ψ(y)) = y and hence f 0 (ψ)ψ 0 (y) = 1. Also, because a = f −1 (y),
we have a = ψ and hence f 0 (a)ψ 0 (y) = 1. In this case, the gradient of the error
function reduces to
N
1X
∇ ln E(w) =
{yn − tn }φn .
(5.95)
s n=1
We have seen that there is a natural pairing between the choice of error function
and the choice of output-unit activation function. Although we have derived this
result in the context of single-layer network models, the same considerations apply
to deep neural networks discussed in later chapters.

166

5. SINGLE-LAYER NETWORKS: CLASSIFICATION
