126

4. SINGLE-LAYER NETWORKS: REGRESSION
N = 25 data points, from the sinusoidal curve h(x) = sin(2πx). The data sets are
indexed by l = 1, . . . , L, where L = 100. For each data set D(l) , we fit a model
with M = 24 Gaussian basis functions along with a constant ‘bias’ basis function to
give a total of 25 parameters. By minimizing the regularized error function (4.26),
we obtain a prediction function f (l) (x), as shown in Figure 4.7.
The top row corresponds to a large value of the regularization coefficient λ that
gives low variance (because the red curves in the left plot look similar) but high
bias (because the two curves in the right plot are very different). Conversely on
the bottom row, for which λ is small, there is large variance (shown by the high
variability between the red curves in the left plot) but low bias (shown by the good
fit between the average model fit and the original sinusoidal function). Note that
the result of averaging many solutions for the complex model with M = 25 is a
very good fit to the regression function, which suggests that averaging may be a
beneficial procedure. Indeed, a weighted averaging of multiple solutions lies at the
heart of a Bayesian approach, although the averaging is with respect to the posterior
distribution of parameters, not with respect to multiple data sets.
We can also examine the bias–variance trade-off quantitatively for this example.
The average prediction is estimated from
L

f (x) =

1 X (l)
f (x),
L

(4.50)

l=1

and the integrated squared bias and integrated variance are then given by
N

(bias)2 =

1 X
2
f (xn ) − h(xn )
N n=1

variance =

1 X 1 X  (l)
2
f (xn ) − f (xn )
N n=1 L

N

(4.51)

L

(4.52)

l=1

where the integral over x, weighted by the distribution p(x), is approximated by a
finite sum over data points drawn from that distribution. These quantities, along with
their sum, are plotted as a function of ln λ in Figure 4.8. We see that small values
of λ allow the model to become finely tuned to the noise on each individual data set
leading to large variance. Conversely, a large value of λ pulls the weight parameters
towards zero leading to large bias.
Note that the bias–variance decomposition is of limited practical value because
it is based on averages with respect to ensembles of data sets, whereas in practice
we have only the single observed data set. If we had a large number of independent
training sets of a given size, we would be better off combining them into a single
larger training set, which of course would reduce the level of over-fitting for a given
model complexity. Nevertheless, the bias–variance decomposition often provides
useful insights into the model complexity issue, and although we have introduced it
in this chapter from the perspective of regression problems, the underlying intuition
has broad applicability.

4.3. The Bias–Variance Trade-off

1

1

ln λ = 3

t

t

−1

−1
0

1

x

1

t

t

−1

−1
1

x

1

t

t

−1

−1
x

x

1

0

x

1

0

x

1

1

ln λ = −3

0

0

1

ln λ = 1

0

127

1

Figure 4.7 Illustration of the dependence of bias and variance on model complexity governed by a regularization parameter λ, using the sinusoidal data from Chapter 1. There are L = 100 data sets, each having N = 25
data points, and there are 24 Gaussian basis functions in the model so that the total number of parameters is
M = 25 including the bias parameter. The left column shows the result of fitting the model to the data sets for
various values of ln λ (for clarity, only 20 of the 100 fits are shown). The right column shows the corresponding
average of the 100 fits (red) along with the sinusoidal function from which the data sets were generated (green).

128

4. SINGLE-LAYER NETWORKS: REGRESSION

Figure 4.8 Plot of squared bias and variance, together with their sum, corresponding to the results shown in Figure 4.7. Also
shown is the average test set error for a
test data set size of 1,000 points. The minimum value of (bias)2 + variance occurs
around ln λ = 0.43, which is close to the
value that gives the minimum error on the
test data.

0.25

(bias)2
variance
(bias)2 + variance
test error
0
−3

0

3

ln λ

Exercises

4.1 (?) Consider the sum-of-squares error function given by (1.2) in which the function
y(x, w) is given by the polynomial (1.1). Show that the coefficients w = {wi } that
minimize this error function are given by the solution to the following set of linear
equations:
M
X
Aij wj = Ti
(4.53)
j =0

where
Aij =

N
X

(xn )i+j ,

Ti =

n=1

N
X

(xn )i tn .

(4.54)

n=1

Here a suffix i or j denotes the index of a component, whereas (x)i denotes x raised
to the power of i.
4.2 (?) Write down the set of coupled linear equations, analogous to (4.53), satisfied by
the coefficients wi that minimize the regularized sum-of-squares error function given
by (1.4).
4.3 (?) Show that the tanh function defined by
tanh(a) =

ea − e−a
ea + e−a

(4.55)

and the logistic sigmoid function defined by (4.6) are related by
tanh(a) = 2σ(2a) − 1.

(4.56)

Hence, show that a general linear combination of logistic sigmoid functions of the
form


M
X
x − µj
(4.57)
y(x, w) = w0 +
wj σ
s
j =1

Exercises

129

is equivalent to a linear combination of tanh functions of the form
y(x, u) = u0 +

M
X


uj tanh

j =1

x − µj
2s


(4.58)

and find expressions to relate the new parameters {u1 , . . . , uM } to the original parameters {w1 , . . . , wM }.
4.4 (? ? ?) Show that the matrix

Φ(ΦT Φ)−1 ΦT

(4.59)

takes any vector v and projects it onto the space spanned by the columns of Φ. Use
this result to show that the least-squares solution (4.14) corresponds to an orthogonal
projection of the vector t onto the manifold S, as shown in Figure 4.3.
4.5 (?) Consider a data set in which each data point tn is associated with a weighting
factor rn > 0, so that the sum-of-squares error function becomes
N

ED (w) =

1X 
2
rn tn − wT φ(xn ) .
2 n=1

(4.60)

Find an expression for the solution w? that minimizes this error function. Give two
alternative interpretations of the weighted sum-of-squares error function in terms of
(i) data-dependent noise variance and (ii) replicated data points.
4.6 (?) By setting the gradient of (4.26) with respect to w to zero, show that the exact
minimum of the regularized sum-of-squares error function for linear regression is
given by (4.27).
4.7 (? ?) Consider a linear basis function regression model for a multivariate target variable t having a Gaussian distribution of the form
p(t|W, Σ) = N (t|y(x, W), Σ)

(4.61)

y(x, W) = WT φ(x)

(4.62)

where
together with a training data set comprising input basis vectors φ(xn ) and corresponding target vectors tn , with n = 1, . . . , N . Show that the maximum likelihood
solution WML for the parameter matrix W has the property that each column is
given by an expression of the form (4.14), which was the solution for an isotropic
noise distribution. Note that this is independent of the covariance matrix Σ. Show
that the maximum likelihood solution for Σ is given by
N


T
1 X
T
T
Σ=
tn − WML
φ(xn ) tn − WML
φ(xn ) .
N n=1

(4.63)

130

4. SINGLE-LAYER NETWORKS: REGRESSION
4.8 (?) Consider the generalization of the squared-loss function (4.35) for a single target
variable t to multiple target variables described by the vector t given by
ZZ
E[L(t, f (x))] =
kf (x) − tk2 p(x, t) dx dt.
(4.64)
Using the calculus of variations, show that the function f (x) for which this expected
loss is minimized is given by
f (x) = Et [t|x].

(4.65)

4.9 (?) By expansion of the square in (4.64), derive a result analogous to (4.39) and,
hence, show that the function f (x) that minimizes the expected squared loss for a
vector t of target variables is again given by the conditional expectation of t in the
form (4.65).
4.10 (? ?) Rederive the result (4.65) by first expanding (4.64) analogous to (4.39).
4.11 (? ?) The following distribution
p(x|σ 2 , q) =



|x|q
exp
−
2σ 2
2(2σ 2 )1/q Γ(1/q)
q

(4.66)

is a generalization of the univariate Gaussian distribution. Here Γ(x) is the gamma
function defined by
Z
∞

ux−1 e−u du.

(4.67)

Show that this distribution is normalized so that
Z ∞
p(x|σ 2 , q) dx = 1

(4.68)

Γ(x) =

−∞

−∞

and that it reduces to the Gaussian when q = 2. Consider a regression model in
which the target variable is given by t = y(x, w)+ and  is a random noise variable
drawn from the distribution (4.66). Show that the log likelihood function over w and
σ 2 , for an observed data set of input vectors X = {x1 , . . . , xN } and corresponding
target variables t = (t1 , . . . , tN )T , is given by
ln p(t|X, w, σ 2 ) = −

N
N
1 X
ln(2σ 2 ) + const
|y(xn , w) − tn |q −
2
2σ n=1
q

(4.69)

where ‘const’ denotes terms independent of both w and σ 2 . Note that, as a function
of w, this is the Lq error function considered in Section 4.2.
4.12 (? ?) Consider the expected loss for regression problems under the Lq loss function
given by (4.40). Write down the condition that y(x) must satisfy to minimize E[Lq ].
Show that, for q = 1, this solution represents the conditional median, i.e., the function y(x) such that the probability mass for t < y(x) is the same as for t ⩾ y(x).
Also show that the minimum expected Lq loss for q → 0 is given by the conditional
mode, i.e., by the function y(x) being equal to the value of t that maximizes p(t|x)
for each x.

5
Single-layer
Networks:
Classification

In the previous chapter, we explored a class of regression models in which the output variables were linear functions of the model parameters and which can therefore
be expressed as simple neural networks having a single layer of weight and bias
parameters. We turn now to a discussion of classification problems, and in this chapter, we will focus on an analogous class of models that again can be expressed as
single-layer neural networks. These will allow us to introduce many of the key concepts of classification before dealing with more general deep neural networks in later
chapters.
The goal in classification is to take an input vector x ∈ RD and assign it to one
of K discrete classes Ck where k = 1, . . . , K. In the most common scenario, the
classes are taken to be disjoint, so that each input is assigned to one and only one
class. The input space is thereby divided into decision regions whose boundaries are
called decision boundaries or decision surfaces. In this chapter, we consider linear

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
C. M. Bishop, H. Bishop, Deep Learning, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-45468-4_5

131

132

5. SINGLE-LAYER NETWORKS: CLASSIFICATION

Section 5.2.4

models for classification, by which we mean that the decision surfaces are linear
functions of the input vector x and, hence, are defined by (D − 1)-dimensional
hyperplanes within the D-dimensional input space. Data sets whose classes can
be separated exactly by linear decision surfaces are said to be linearly separable.
Linear classification models can be applied to data sets that are not linearly separable,
although not all inputs will be correctly classified.
We can broadly identify three distinct approaches to solving classification problems. The simplest involves constructing a discriminant function that directly assigns
each vector x to a specific class. A more powerful approach, however, models the
conditional probability distributions p(Ck |x) in an inference stage and subsequently
uses these distributions to make optimal decisions. Separating inference and decision brings numerous benefits. There are two different approaches to determining
the conditional probabilities p(Ck |x). One technique is to model them directly, for
example by representing them as parametric models and then optimizing the parameters using a training set. This will be called a discriminative probabilistic model.
Alternatively, we can model the class-conditional densities p(x|Ck ), together with
the prior probabilities p(Ck ) for the classes, and then compute the required posterior
probabilities using Bayes’ theorem:
p(Ck |x) =

p(x|Ck )p(Ck )
.
p(x)

(5.1)

This will be called a generative probabilistic model because it offers the opportunity
to generate samples from each of the class-conditional densities p(x|Ck ). In this
chapter, we will discuss examples of all three approaches: discriminant functions,
generative probabilistic models, and discriminative probabilistic models.

5.1. Discriminant Functions
A discriminant is a function that takes an input vector x and assigns it to one of K
classes, denoted Ck . In this chapter, we will restrict attention to linear discriminants,
namely those for which the decision surfaces are hyperplanes. To simplify the discussion, we consider first two classes and then investigate the extension to K > 2
classes.

5.1.1

Two classes

The simplest representation of a linear discriminant function is obtained by taking a linear function of the input vector so that
y(x) = wT x + w0

(5.2)

where w is called a weight vector, and w0 is a bias (not to be confused with bias in
the statistical sense). An input vector x is assigned to class C1 if y(x) ⩾ 0 and to
class C2 otherwise. The corresponding decision boundary is therefore defined by the
relation y(x) = 0, which corresponds to a (D − 1)-dimensional hyperplane within

133

5.1. Discriminant Functions
Figure 5.1 Illustration of the geometry of
a linear discriminant function in two dimensions. The decision surface, shown in red,
is perpendicular to w, and its displacement
from the origin is controlled by the bias parameter w0 . Also, the signed orthogonal
distance of a general point x from the decision surface is given by y(x)/kwk.

x2

y>0
y=0
y<0

R1
R2

x
w

y(x)
kwk

x⊥
x1
−w0
kwk

the D-dimensional input space. Consider two points xA and xB both of which lie on
the decision surface. Because y(xA ) = y(xB ) = 0, we have wT (xA − xB ) = 0 and
hence the vector w is orthogonal to every vector lying within the decision surface,
and so w determines the orientation of the decision surface. Similarly, if x is a point
on the decision surface, then y(x) = 0, and so the normal distance from the origin
to the decision surface is given by
w0
wT x
=−
.
kwk
kwk

(5.3)

We therefore see that the bias parameter w0 determines the location of the decision
surface. These properties are illustrated for the case of D = 2 in Figure 5.1.
Furthermore, note that the value of y(x) gives a signed measure of the perpendicular distance r of the point x from the decision surface. To see this, consider an
arbitrary point x and let x⊥ be its orthogonal projection onto the decision surface,
so that
w
x = x⊥ + r
.
(5.4)
kwk

Multiplying both sides of this result by wT and adding w0 , and making use of y(x) =
wT x + w0 and y(x⊥ ) = wT x⊥ + w0 = 0, we have
r=

Section 4.1.1

y(x)
.
kwk

(5.5)

This result is illustrated in Figure 5.1.
As with linear regression models, it is sometimes convenient to use a more compact notation in which we introduce an additional dummy ‘input’ value x0 = 1 and
e = (w0 , w) and x
e = (x0 , x) so that
then define w
e Tx
e.
y(x) = w

(5.6)

134

5. SINGLE-LAYER NETWORKS: CLASSIFICATION

C3

C1
?
R1

R3

R1

C1

R2

?
C3

C1
R3

R2
C2

C2

not C1

C2

not C2

Figure 5.2 Attempting to construct a K-class discriminant from a set of two-class discriminant functions leads
to ambiguous regions, as shown in green. On the left is an example with two discriminant functions designed to
distinguish points in class Ck from points not in class Ck . On the right is an example involving three discriminant
functions each of which is used to separate a pair of classes Ck and Cj .

In this case, the decision surfaces are D-dimensional hyperplanes passing through
the origin of the (D + 1)-dimensional expanded input space.

5.1.2

Multiple classes

Now consider the extension of linear discriminant functions to K > 2 classes.
We might be tempted to build a K-class discriminant by combining a number of
two-class discriminant functions. However, this leads to some serious difficulties
(Duda and Hart, 1973), as we now show.
Consider a model with K − 1 classifiers, each of which solves a two-class problem of separating points in a particular class Ck from points not in that class. This
is known as a one-versus-the-rest classifier. The left-hand example in Figure 5.2
shows an example involving three classes where this approach leads to regions of
input space that are ambiguously classified.
An alternative is to introduce K(K − 1)/2 binary discriminant functions, one
for every possible pair of classes. This is known as a one-versus-one classifier. Each
point is then classified according to a majority vote amongst the discriminant functions. However, this too runs into the problem of ambiguous regions, as illustrated
in the right-hand diagram of Figure 5.2.
We can avoid these difficulties by considering a single K-class discriminant
comprising K linear functions of the form
yk (x) = wkT x + wk0

(5.7)

and then assigning a point x to class Ck if yk (x) > yj (x) for all j 6= k. The decision
boundary between class Ck and class Cj is therefore given by yk (x) = yj (x) and

5.1. Discriminant Functions
Figure 5.3

Illustration of the decision regions for a
multi-class linear discriminant, with the
decision boundaries shown in red. If
two points xA and xB both lie inside the
same decision region Rk , then any point
b that lies on the line connecting these
x
two points must also lie in Rk , and hence,
the decision region must be singly connected and convex.

135

Rj
Ri
Rk
xB
xA

b
x

hence corresponds to a (D − 1)-dimensional hyperplane defined by
(wk − wj )T x + (wk0 − wj 0 ) = 0.

(5.8)

This has the same form as the decision boundary for the two-class case discussed in
Section 5.1.1, and so analogous geometrical properties apply.
The decision regions of such a discriminant are always singly connected and
convex. To see this, consider two points xA and xB both of which lie inside decision
b that lies on the line connecting
region Rk , as illustrated in Figure 5.3. Any point x
xA and xB can be expressed in the form
b = λxA + (1 − λ)xB
x

(5.9)

where 0 ⩽ λ ⩽ 1. From the linearity of the discriminant functions, it follows that
yk (b
x) = λyk (xA ) + (1 − λ)yk (xB ).

Section 5.1.1

(5.10)

Because both xA and xB lie inside Rk , it follows that yk (xA ) > yj (xA ) and that
b also lies inside
yk (xB ) > yj (xB ), for all j 6= k, and hence yk (b
x) > yj (b
x), and so x
Rk . Thus, Rk is singly connected and convex.
Note that for two classes, we can either employ the formalism discussed here,
based on two discriminant functions y1 (x) and y2 (x), or else use the simpler but
essentially equivalent formulation based on a single discriminant function y(x).

5.1.3

1-of-K coding

For regression problems, the target variable t was simply the vector of real numbers whose values we wish to predict. In classification, there are various ways of
using target values to represent class labels. For two-class problems, the most convenient is the binary representation in which there is a single target variable t ∈ {0, 1}
such that t = 1 represents class C1 and t = 0 represents class C2 . We can interpret
the value of t as the probability that the class is C1 , with the probability values taking
only the extreme values of 0 and 1. For K > 2 classes, it is convenient to use a
1-of-K coding scheme, also known as the one-hot encoding scheme, in which t is
a vector of length K such that if the class is Cj , then all elements tk of t are zero

136

5. SINGLE-LAYER NETWORKS: CLASSIFICATION
except element tj , which takes the value 1. For instance, if we have K = 5 classes,
then a data point from class 2 would be given the target vector
t = (0, 1, 0, 0, 0)T .

(5.11)

Again, we can interpret the value of tk as the probability that the class is Ck in which
the probabilities take only the values 0 and 1.

5.1.4
Section 4.1.3

Exercise 5.1

Least squares for classification

With linear regression models, the minimization of a sum-of-squares error function leads to a simple closed-form solution for the parameter values. It is therefore
tempting to see if we can apply the same least-squares formalism to classification
problems. Consider a general classification problem with K classes and a 1-of-K
binary coding scheme for the target vector t. One justification for using least squares
in such a context is that it approximates the conditional expectation E[t|x] of the
target values given the input vector. For a binary coding scheme, this conditional expectation is given by the vector of posterior class probabilities. Unfortunately, these
probabilities are typically approximated rather poorly, and indeed the approximations can have values outside the range (0, 1). However, it is instructional to explore
these simple models and to understand how these limitations arise.
Each class Ck is described by its own linear model so that
yk (x) = wkT x + wk0

(5.12)

where k = 1, . . . , K. We can conveniently group these together using vector notation so that
f Tx
e
y(x) = W
(5.13)
f is a matrix whose kth column comprises the (D + 1)-dimensional vector
where W
e is the corresponding augmented input vector (1, xT )T with
e k = (wk0 , wkT )T and x
w
a dummy input x0 = 1. A new input x is then assigned to the class for which the
e is largest.
e kT x
output yk = w
f by minimizing a sum-of-squares
We now determine the parameter matrix W
error function. Consider a training data set {xn , tn } where n = 1, . . . , N , and
e
define a matrix T whose nth row is the vector tT
n , together with a matrix X whose
T
en . The sum-of-squares error function can then be written as
nth row is x
n
o
f = 1 Tr (X
eW
f − T)T (X
eW
f − T) .
ED (W)
2

(5.14)

f to zero and rearranging, we obtain the soluSetting the derivative with respect to W
f in the form
tion for W
f = (X
e T X)
e −1 X
e TT = X
e †T
W
Section 4.1.3

(5.15)

e † is the pseudo-inverse of the matrix X.
e We then obtain the discriminant
where X

5.1. Discriminant Functions
function in the form

 T
f Tx
e† x
e = TT X
e.
y(x) = W

137

(5.16)

An interesting property of least-squares solutions with multiple target variables
is that if every target vector in the training set satisfies some linear constraint
aT t n + b = 0
Exercise 5.3

Section 2.3.4

Section 5.4.3

(5.17)

for some constants a and b, then the model prediction for any value of x will satisfy
the same constraint so that
aT y(x) + b = 0.
(5.18)
Thus, if we use a 1-of-K coding scheme for K classes, then the predictions made
by the model will have the property that the elements of y(x) will sum to 1 for any
value of x. However, this summation constraint alone is not sufficient to allow the
model outputs to be interpreted as probabilities because they are not constrained to
lie within the interval (0, 1).
The least-squares approach gives an exact closed-form solution for the discriminant function parameters. However, even as a discriminant function (where we use
it to make decisions directly and dispense with any probabilistic interpretation), it
suffers from some severe problems. We have seen that the sum-of-squares error
function can be viewed as the negative log likelihood under the assumption of a
Gaussian noise distribution. If the true distribution of the data is markedly different
from being Gaussian, then least squares can give poor results. In particular, least
squares is very sensitive to the presence of outliers, which are data points located a
long way from the bulk of the data. This is illustrated in Figure 5.4. Here we see that
the additional data points in the right-hand figure produce a significant change in the
location of the decision boundary, even though these points would be correctly classified by the original decision boundary in the left-hand figure. The sum-of-squares
error function gives too much weight to data points that are a long way from the
decision boundary, even though they are correctly classified. Outliers can arise due
to rare events or may simply be due to mistakes in the data set. Techniques that are
sensitive to a very few data points are said to lack robustness. For comparison, Figure 5.4 also shows results from a technique called logistic regression, which is more
robust to outliers.
The failure of least squares should not surprise us when we recall that it corresponds to maximum likelihood under the assumption of a Gaussian conditional
distribution, whereas binary target vectors clearly have a distribution that is far from
Gaussian. By adopting more appropriate probabilistic models, we can obtain classification techniques with much better properties than least squares, and which can
also be generalized to give flexible nonlinear neural network models, as we will see
in later chapters.

138

5. SINGLE-LAYER NETWORKS: CLASSIFICATION
4

4

2

2

0

0

−2

−2

−4

−4

−6

−6

−8

−8

−4

−2

0

2

4

6

8

−4

−2

0

2

4

6

8

Figure 5.4 The left-hand plot shows data from two classes, denoted by red crosses and blue circles, together
with the decision boundaries found by least squares (magenta curve) and by a logistic regression model (green
curve). The right-hand plot shows the corresponding results obtained when extra data points are added at the
bottom right of the diagram, showing that least squares is highly sensitive to outliers, unlike logistic regression.

5.2. Decision Theory

Section 4.2

When we discussed linear regression we saw how the process of making predictions
in machine learning can be broken down into the two stages of inference and decision. We now explore this perspective in much greater depth specifically in the
context of classifiers.
Suppose we have an input vector x together with a corresponding vector t of
target variables, and our goal is to predict t given a new value for x. For regression
problems, t will comprise continuous variables and in general will be a vector as
we may wish to predict several related quantities. For classification problems, t will
represent class labels. Again, t will in general be a vector if we have more than
two classes. The joint probability distribution p(x, t) provides a complete summary
of the uncertainty associated with these variables. Determining p(x, t) from a set
of training data is an example of inference and is typically a very difficult problem
whose solution forms the subject of much of this book. In a practical application,
however, we must often make a specific prediction for the value of t or more generally take a specific action based on our understanding of the values t is likely to
take, and this aspect is the subject of decision theory.
Consider, for example, our earlier medical diagnosis problem in which we have
taken an image of a skin lesion on a patient, and we wish to determine whether the
patient has cancer. In this case, the input vector x is the set of pixel intensities in

5.2. Decision Theory

139

the image, and the output variable t will represent the absence of cancer, which we
denote by the class C1 , or the presence of cancer, which we denote by the class C2 .
We might, for instance, choose t to be a binary variable such that t = 0 corresponds
to class C1 and t = 1 corresponds to class C2 . We will see later that this choice of
label values is particularly convenient when working with probabilities. The general inference problem then involves determining the joint distribution p(x, Ck ), or
equivalently p(x, t), which gives us the most complete probabilistic description of
the variables. Although this can be a very useful and informative quantity, ultimately,
we must decide either to give treatment to the patient or not, and we would like this
choice to be optimal according to some appropriate criterion (Duda and Hart, 1973).
This is the decision step, and the aim of decision theory is that it should tell us how
to make optimal decisions given the appropriate probabilities. We will see that the
decision stage is generally very simple, even trivial, once we have solved the inference problem. Here we give an introduction to the key ideas of decision theory
as required for the rest of the book. Further background, as well as more detailed
accounts, can be found in Berger (1985) and Bather (2000).
Before giving a more detailed analysis, let us first consider informally how we
might expect probabilities to play a role in making decisions. When we obtain the
skin image x for a new patient, our goal is to decide which of the two classes to assign
the image to. We are therefore interested in the probabilities of the two classes, given
the image, which are given by p(Ck |x). Using Bayes’ theorem, these probabilities
can be expressed in the form
p(Ck |x) =

p(x|Ck )p(Ck )
.
p(x)

(5.19)

Note that any of the quantities appearing in Bayes’ theorem can be obtained from
the joint distribution p(x, Ck ) by either marginalizing or conditioning with respect to
the appropriate variables. We can now interpret p(Ck ) as the prior probability for the
class Ck and p(Ck |x) as the corresponding posterior probability. Thus, p(C1 ) represents the probability that a person has cancer, before the image is taken. Similarly,
p(C1 |x) is the posterior probability, revised using Bayes’ theorem in light of the information contained in the image. If our aim is to minimize the chance of assigning
x to the wrong class, then intuitively we would choose the class having the higher
posterior probability. We now show that this intuition is correct, and we also discuss
more general criteria for making decisions.

5.2.1

Misclassification rate

Suppose that our goal is simply to make as few misclassifications as possible.
We need a rule that assigns each value of x to one of the available classes. Such a
rule will divide the input space into regions Rk called decision regions, one for each
class, such that all points in Rk are assigned to class Ck . The boundaries between
decision regions are called decision boundaries or decision surfaces. Note that each
decision region need not be contiguous but could comprise some number of disjoint
regions. To find the optimal decision rule, consider first the case of two classes, as in
the cancer problem, for instance. A mistake occurs when an input vector belonging

140

5. SINGLE-LAYER NETWORKS: CLASSIFICATION
to class C1 is assigned to class C2 or vice versa. The probability of this occurring is
given by
p(mistake) = p(x ∈ R1 , C2 ) + p(x ∈ R2 , C1 )
Z
Z
=
p(x, C2 ) dx +
p(x, C1 ) dx.
R1

(5.20)

R2

We are free to choose the decision rule that assigns each point x to one of the
two classes. Clearly, to minimize p(mistake) we should arrange that each x is assigned to whichever class has the smaller value of the integrand in (5.20). Thus, if
p(x, C1 ) > p(x, C2 ) for a given value of x, then we should assign that x to class
C1 . From the product rule of probability, we have p(x, Ck ) = p(Ck |x)p(x). Because
the factor p(x) is common to both terms, we can restate this result as saying that
the minimum probability of making a mistake is obtained if each value of x is assigned to the class for which the posterior probability p(Ck |x) is largest. This result
is illustrated for two classes and a single input variable x in Figure 5.5.
For the more general case of K classes, it is slightly easier to maximize the
probability of being correct, which is given by
p(correct) =

K
X
k=1

=

p(x ∈ Rk , Ck )

K Z
X
k=1

Rk

p(x, Ck ) dx,

(5.21)

which is maximized when the regions Rk are chosen such that each x is assigned
to the class for which p(x, Ck ) is largest. Again, using the product rule p(x, Ck ) =
p(Ck |x)p(x), and noting that the factor of p(x) is common to all terms, we see
that each x should be assigned to the class having the largest posterior probability
p(Ck |x).

5.2.2

Expected loss

For many applications, our objective will be more complex than simply minimizing the number of misclassifications. Let us consider again the medical diagnosis
problem. We note that, if a patient who does not have cancer is incorrectly diagnosed
as having cancer, the consequences may be that they experience some distress plus
there is the need for further investigations. Conversely, if a patient with cancer is
diagnosed as healthy, the result may be premature death due to lack of treatment.
Thus, the consequences of these two types of mistake can be dramatically different.
It would clearly be better to make fewer mistakes of the second kind, even if this was
at the expense of making more mistakes of the first kind.
We can formalize such issues through the introduction of a loss function, also
called a cost function, which is a single, overall measure of loss incurred in taking
any of the available decisions or actions. Our goal is then to minimize the total loss
incurred. Note that some authors consider instead a utility function, whose value

5.2. Decision Theory
R1

141

R2

p(x, C1 )
p(x, C2 )

x0

x̂

(a)
R1

R2

p(x, C1 )
p(x, C2 )

x̂
(b)
Figure 5.5 Schematic illustration of the joint probabilities p(x, Ck ) for each of two classes plotted against x,
together with the decision boundary x = x
b. Values of x ⩾ x
b are classified as class C2 and hence belong to
decision region R2 , whereas points x < x
b are classified as C1 and belong to R1 . Errors arise from the blue,
green, and red regions, so that for x < x
b, the errors are due to points from class C2 being misclassified as C1
(represented by the sum of the red and green regions). Conversely for points in the region x ⩾ x
b, the errors are
due to points from class C1 being misclassified as C2 (represented by the blue region). By varying the location
x
b of the decision boundary, as indicated by the red double-headed arrow in (a), the combined areas of the blue
and green regions remains constant, whereas the size of the red region varies. The optimal choice for x
b is where
the curves for p(x, C1 ) and p(x, C2 ) cross, as shown in (b) and corresponding to x
b = x0 , because in this case
the red region disappears. This is equivalent to the minimum misclassification rate decision rule, which assigns
each value of x to the class having the higher posterior probability p(Ck |x).

142

5. SINGLE-LAYER NETWORKS: CLASSIFICATION

Figure 5.6 An example of a loss matrix with elements
Lkj for the cancer treatment problem. The rows correspond to the true class, whereas the columns correspond to the assignment of class made by our decision
criterion.

normal
cancer



normal
0
100

cancer

1
0

they aim to maximize. These are equivalent concepts if we take the utility to be
simply the negative of the loss. Throughout this text we will use the loss function
convention. Suppose that, for a new value of x, the true class is Ck and that we assign
x to class Cj (where j may or may not be equal to k). In so doing, we incur some
level of loss that we denote by Lkj , which we can view as the k, j element of a loss
matrix. For instance, in our cancer example, we might have a loss matrix of the form
shown in Figure 5.6. This particular loss matrix says that there is no loss incurred if
the correct decision is made, there is a loss of 1 if a healthy patient is diagnosed as
having cancer, whereas there is a loss of 100 if a patient having cancer is diagnosed
as healthy.
The optimal solution is the one that minimizes the loss function. However, the
loss function depends on the true class, which is unknown. For a given input vector x,
our uncertainty in the true class is expressed through the joint probability distribution
p(x, Ck ), and so we seek instead to minimize the average loss, where the average is
computed with respect to this distribution and is given by
XXZ
Lkj p(x, Ck ) dx.
(5.22)
E[L] =
j

k

Rj

Each x can be assigned independently to one of the decision regions Rj . Our goal
is to choose the regions Rj to minimize
the expected loss (5.22), which implies that
P
for each x, we should minimize k Lkj p(x, Ck ). As before, we can use the product
rule p(x, Ck ) = p(Ck |x)p(x) to eliminate the common factor of p(x). Thus, the
decision rule that minimizes the expected loss assigns each new x to the class j for
which the quantity
X
Lkj p(Ck |x)
(5.23)
k

is a minimum. Once we have chosen values for the loss matrix elements Lkj , this is
clearly trivial to do.

5.2.3

The reject option

We have seen that classification errors arise from the regions of input space
where the largest of the posterior probabilities p(Ck |x) is significantly less than unity
or equivalently where the joint distributions p(x, Ck ) have comparable values. These
are the regions where we are relatively uncertain about class membership. In some
applications, it will be appropriate to avoid making decisions on the difficult cases
in anticipation of obtaining a lower error rate on those examples for which a classification decision is made. This is known as the reject option. For example, in our
hypothetical cancer screening example, it may be appropriate to use an automatic

5.2. Decision Theory
Figure 5.7

Illustration of the reject option. Inputs
x such that the larger of the two poste- 1.0
rior probabilities is less than or equal to
θ
some threshold θ will be rejected.

p(C1 |x)

p(C2 |x)

0.0
reject region

Exercise 5.10

143

x

system to classify those images for which there is little doubt as to the correct class,
while requesting a biopsy to classify the more ambiguous cases. We can achieve this
by introducing a threshold θ and rejecting those inputs x for which the largest of
the posterior probabilities p(Ck |x) is less than or equal to θ. This is illustrated for
two classes and a single continuous input variable x in Figure 5.7. Note that setting
θ = 1 will ensure that all examples are rejected, whereas if there are K classes, then
setting θ < 1/K will ensure that no examples are rejected. Thus, the fraction of
examples that are rejected is controlled by the value of θ.
We can easily extend the reject criterion to minimize the expected loss, when a
loss matrix is given, by taking account of the loss incurred when a reject decision is
made.

5.2.4

Inference and decision

We have broken the classification problem down into two separate stages, the
inference stage in which we use training data to learn a model for p(Ck |x) and the
subsequent decision stage in which we use these posterior probabilities to make optimal class assignments. An alternative possibility would be to solve both problems
together and simply learn a function that maps inputs x directly into decisions. Such
a function is called a discriminant function.
In fact, we can identify three distinct approaches to solving decision problems,
all of which have been used in practical applications. These are, in decreasing order
of complexity, as follows:
(a) First, solve the inference problem of determining the class-conditional densities p(x|Ck ) for each class Ck individually. Separately infer the prior class
probabilities p(Ck ). Then use Bayes’ theorem in the form
p(Ck |x) =

p(x|Ck )p(Ck )
p(x)

(5.24)

to find the posterior class probabilities p(Ck |x). As usual, the denominator in

144

5. SINGLE-LAYER NETWORKS: CLASSIFICATION
Bayes’ theorem can be found in terms of the quantities in the numerator, using
X
p(x) =
p(x|Ck )p(Ck ).
(5.25)
k

Equivalently, we can model the joint distribution p(x, Ck ) directly and then
normalize to obtain the posterior probabilities. Having found the posterior
probabilities, we use decision theory to determine the class membership for
each new input x. Approaches that explicitly or implicitly model the distribution of inputs as well as outputs are known as generative models, because by
sampling from them, it is possible to generate synthetic data points in the input
space.
(b) First, solve the inference problem of determining the posterior class probabilities p(Ck |x), and then subsequently use decision theory to assign each new x to
one of the classes. Approaches that model the posterior probabilities directly
are called discriminative models.
(c) Find a function f (x), called a discriminant function, that maps each input x
directly onto a class label. For instance, for two-class problems, f (·) might be
binary valued and such that f = 0 represents class C1 and f = 1 represents
class C2 . In this case, probabilities play no role.
Let us consider the relative merits of these three alternatives. Approach (a) is the
most demanding because it involves finding the joint distribution over both x and
Ck . For many applications, x will have high dimensionality, and consequently, we
may need a large training set to be able to determine the class-conditional densities to
reasonable accuracy. Note that the class priors p(Ck ) can often be estimated simply
from the fractions of the training set data points in each of the classes. One advantage
of approach (a), however, is that it also allows the marginal density of data p(x) to
be determined from (5.25). This can be useful for detecting new data points that
have low probability under the model and for which the predictions may be of low
accuracy, which is known as outlier detection or novelty detection (Bishop, 1994;
Tarassenko, 1995).
However, if we wish only to make classification decisions, then it can be wasteful of computational resources and excessively demanding of data to find the joint
distribution p(x, Ck ) when in fact we really need only the posterior probabilities
p(Ck |x), which can be obtained directly through approach (b). Indeed, the classconditional densities may contain a significant amount of structure that has little effect on the posterior probabilities, as illustrated in Figure 5.8. There has been much
interest in exploring the relative merits of generative and discriminative approaches
to machine learning and in finding ways to combine them (Jebara, 2004; Lasserre,
Bishop, and Minka, 2006).
An even simpler approach is (c) in which we use the training data to find a
discriminant function f (x) that maps each x directly onto a class label, thereby
combining the inference and decision stages into a single learning problem. In the
example of Figure 5.8, this would correspond to finding the value of x shown by

145

5.2. Decision Theory
5

1.2
p(x|C2 )

class densities

4

p(C1 |x)

1

p(C2 |x)

0.8

3

0.6
2

0.4

p(x|C1 )
1
0

0.2

0

0.2

0.4

0.6
x

0.8

1

0

0

0.2

0.4

x

0.6

0.8

1

Figure 5.8 Example of the class-conditional densities for two classes having a single input variable x (left
plot) together with the corresponding posterior probabilities (right plot). Note that the left-hand mode of the
class-conditional density p(x|C1 ), shown in blue on the left plot, has no effect on the posterior probabilities. The
vertical green line in the right plot shows the decision boundary in x that gives the minimum misclassification
rate, assuming the prior class probabilities, p(C1 ) and p(C2 ), are equal.

the vertical green line, because this is the decision boundary giving the minimum
probability of misclassification.
With option (c), however, we no longer have access to the posterior probabilities
p(Ck |x). There are many powerful reasons for wanting to compute the posterior
probabilities, even if we subsequently use them to make decisions. These include:
Minimizing risk. Consider a problem in which the elements of the loss matrix are
subjected to revision from time to time (such as might occur in a financial
application). If we know the posterior probabilities, we can trivially revise the
minimum risk decision criterion by modifying (5.23) appropriately. If we have
only a discriminant function, then any change to the loss matrix would require
that we return to the training data and solve the inference problem afresh.
Reject option. Posterior probabilities allow us to determine a rejection criterion that
will minimize the misclassification rate, or more generally the expected loss,
for a given fraction of rejected data points.
Section 2.1.1

Compensating for class priors. Consider our cancer screening example again, and
suppose that we have collected a large number of images from the general population for use as training data, which we use to build an automated screening
system. Because cancer is rare amongst the general population, we might find
that, say, only 1 in every 1,000 examples corresponds to the presence of cancer.

146

5. SINGLE-LAYER NETWORKS: CLASSIFICATION
If we used such a data set to train an adaptive model, we could run into severe
difficulties due to the small proportion of those in the cancer class. For instance, a classifier that assigned every point to the normal class would achieve
99.9% accuracy, and it may be difficult to avoid this trivial solution. Also, even
a large data set will contain very few examples of skin images corresponding
to cancer, and so the learning algorithm will not be exposed to a broad range
of examples of such images and hence is not likely to generalize well. A balanced data set with equal numbers of examples from each of the classes would
allow us to find a more accurate model. However, we then have to compensate
for the effects of our modifications to the training data. Suppose we have used
such a modified data set and found models for the posterior probabilities. From
Bayes’ theorem (5.24), we see that the posterior probabilities are proportional
to the prior probabilities, which we can interpret as the fractions of points in
each class. We can therefore simply take the posterior probabilities obtained
from our artificially balanced data set, divide by the class fractions in that data
set, and then multiply by the class fractions in the population to which we wish
to apply the model. Finally, we need to normalize to ensure that the new posterior probabilities sum to one. Note that this procedure cannot be applied if we
have learned a discriminant function directly instead of determining posterior
probabilities.
Combining models. For complex applications, we may wish to break the problem
into a number of smaller sub-problems each of which can be tackled by a separate module. For example, in our hypothetical medical diagnosis problem,
we may have information available from, say, blood tests as well as skin images. Rather than combine all of this heterogeneous information into one huge
input space, it may be more effective to build one system to interpret the images and a different one to interpret the blood data. If each of the two models
gives posterior probabilities for the classes, then we can combine the outputs
systematically using the rules of probability. One simple way to do this is to
assume that, for each class separately, the distributions of inputs for the images, denoted by xI , and the blood data, denoted by xB , are independent, so
that
p(xI , xB |Ck ) = p(xI |Ck )p(xB |Ck ).
(5.26)

Section 11.2

This is an example of a conditional independence property, because the independence holds when the distribution is conditioned on the class Ck . The
posterior probability, given both the image and blood data, is then given by
p(Ck |xI , xB ) ∝ p(xI , xB |Ck )p(Ck )
∝ p(xI |Ck )p(xB |Ck )p(Ck )
p(Ck |xI )p(Ck |xB )
.
∝
p(Ck )

(5.27)

Thus, we need the class prior probabilities p(Ck ), which we can easily estimate
from the fractions of data points in each class, and then we need to normalize

5.2. Decision Theory
Figure 5.9 The confusion matrix for the cancer treatment problem, in which the rows correspond to the true
class and the columns correspond to the assignment
of class made by our decision criterion. The elements
of the matrix show the numbers of true negatives, false
positives, false negatives, and true positives.

Section 11.2.3

Chapter 7

normal
NTN
NFN

cancer

NFP
NTP

the resulting posterior probabilities so they sum to one. The particular conditional independence assumption (5.26) is an example of a naive Bayes model.
Note that the joint marginal distribution p(xI , xB ) will typically not factorize
under this model. We will see in later chapters how to construct models for
combining data that do not require the conditional independence assumption
(5.26). A further advantage of using models that output probabilities rather
than decisions is that they can easily be made differentiable with respect to
any adjustable parameters (such as the weight coefficients in the polynomial
regression example), which allows them to be composed and trained jointly
using gradient-based optimization methods.

5.2.5

Section 2.1.1

normal
cancer



147

Classifier accuracy

The simplest measure of performance for a classifier is the fraction of test set
points that are correctly classified. However, we have seen that different types of
error can have different consequences, as expressed through the loss matrix, and
often we therefore do not simply wish to minimize the number of misclassifications.
By changing the location of the decision boundary, we can make trade-offs between
different kinds of error, for example with the goal of minimizing an expected loss.
Because this is such an important concept, we will introduce some definitions and
terminology so that the performance of a classifier can be better characterized.
We will consider again our cancer screening example. For each person tested,
there is a ‘true label’ of whether they have cancer or not, and there is also the prediction made by the classifier. If, for a particular person, the classifier predicts cancer
and this is in fact the true label, then the prediction is called a true positive. However, if the person does not have cancer it is a false positive. Likewise, if the classifier
predicts that a person does not have cancer and this is correct, then the prediction is
called a true negative, otherwise it is a false negative. The false positives are also
known as type 1 errors whereas the false negatives are called type 2 errors. If N is
the total number of people taking the test, then NTP is the number of true positives,
NFP is the number of false positives, NTN is the number of true negatives, and NFN
is the number of false negatives, where
N = NTP + NFP + NTN + NFN .

(5.28)

This can be represented as a confusion matrix as shown in Figure 5.9. Accuracy,
measured by the fraction of correct classifications, is then given by
Accuracy =

NTP + NTN
.
NTP + NFP + NTN + NFN

(5.29)

148

5. SINGLE-LAYER NETWORKS: CLASSIFICATION
We can see that accuracy can be misleading if there are strongly imbalanced classes.
In our cancer screening example, for instance, where only 1 person in 1,000 has
cancer, a naive classifier that simply decides that nobody has cancer will achieve
99.9% accuracy and yet is completely useless.
Several other quantities can be defined in terms of these numbers, of which the
most commonly encountered are
NTP
NTP + NFP
NTP
Recall =
NTP + NFN
NFP
False positive rate =
NFP + NTN
NFP
False discovery rate =
NFP + NTP
Precision =

(5.30)
(5.31)
(5.32)
(5.33)

In our cancer screening example, precision represents an estimate of the probability
that a person who has a positive test does indeed have cancer, whereas recall is an
estimate of the probability that a person who has cancer is correctly detected by
the test. The false positive rate is an estimate of the probability that a person who is
normal will be classified as having cancer, whereas the false discovery rate represents
the fraction of those testing positive who do not in fact have cancer.
By altering the location of the decision boundary, we can change the trade-offs
between the two kinds of errors. To understand this trade-off, we revisit Figure 5.5,
but now we label the various regions as shown in Figure 5.10. We can relate the
labelled regions to the various true and false rates as follows:
NFP /N = E
NTP /N = D + E
NFN /N = B + C
NTN /N = A + C

(5.34)
(5.35)
(5.36)
(5.37)

where we are implicitly considering the limit N → ∞ so that we can relate number
of observations to probabilities.

5.2.6

ROC curve

A probabilistic classifier will output a posterior probability, which can be converted to a decision by setting a threshold. As the value of the threshold is varied, we
can reduce type 1 errors at the expense of increasing type 2 errors, or vice versa. To
better understand this trade-off, it is useful to plot the receiver operating characteristic or ROC curve (Fawcett, 2006), a name that originates from procedures to measure
the performance of radar receivers. This is a graph of true positive rate versus false
positive rate, as shown in Figure 5.11.
As the decision boundary in Figure 5.10 is moved from −∞ to ∞, the ROC
curve is traced out and can then be generated by plotting the cumulative fraction of

5.2. Decision Theory
R1

149

R2

p(x, C1 )
p(x, C2 )
B

D

A
C
x0

E
x̂

Figure 5.10 As in Figure 5.5, with the various regions labelled. In the cancer classification problem, region R1
is assigned to the normal class whereas region R2 is assigned to the cancer class.

correct detection of cancer on the y-axis versus the cumulative fraction of incorrect
detection on the x-axis. Note that a specific confusion matrix represents one point
along the ROC curve. The best possible classifier would be represented by a point at
the top left corner of the ROC diagram. The bottom left corner represents a simple
classifier that assigns every point to the normal class and therefore has no true positives but also no false positives. Similarly, the top right corner represents a classifier
that assigns everything to the cancer class and therefore has no false negatives but
also no true negatives. In Figure 5.11, the classifiers represented by the blue curve
are better than those of the red curve for any choice of, say, false positive rate. It
is also possible, however, for such curves to cross over, in which case the choice of
which is better will depend on the choice of operating point.
As a baseline, we can consider a random classifier that simply assigns each data
point to cancer with probability ρ and to normal with probability 1 − ρ. As we vary
the value of ρ it will trace out an ROC curve given by a diagonal straight line, as
shown in Figure 5.11. Any classifier below the diagonal line performs worse than
random guessing.
Sometimes it is useful to have a single number that characterises the whole ROC
curve. One approach is to measure the area under the curve (AUC). A value of 0.5
for the AUC represents random guessing whereas a value of 1.0 represents a perfect
classifier.
Another measure is the F-score, which is the geometric mean of precision and

5. SINGLE-LAYER NETWORKS: CLASSIFICATION
Figure 5.11

The receiver operator characteristic
(ROC) curve is a plot of true positive
rate against false positive rate, and
it characterizes the trade-off between
type 1 and type 2 errors in a classification problem. The upper blue curve
represents a better classifier than the
lower red curve. Here the dashed
curve represents the performance of
a simple random classifier.

1

True positive rate

150

0
0

False positive rate

1

recall, and is therefore defined by
2 × precision × recall
precision + recall
2NTP
=
.
2NTP + NFP + NFN

F =

(5.38)
(5.39)

Of course, we can also combine the confusion matrix in Figure 5.9 with the loss matrix in Figure 5.6 to compute the expected loss by multiplying the elements pointwise
and summing the resulting products.
Although the ROC curve can be extended to more than two classes, it rapidly
becomes cumbersome as the number of classes increases.

5.3. Generative Classifiers

Section 5.2.4

We turn next to a probabilistic view of classification and show how models with
linear decision boundaries arise from simple assumptions about the distribution of
the data. We have already discussed the distinction between the discriminative and
the generative approaches to classification. Here we will adopt a generative approach
in which we model the class-conditional densities p(x|Ck ) as well as the class priors
p(Ck ) and then use these to compute posterior probabilities p(Ck |x) through Bayes’
theorem.
First, consider problems having two classes. The posterior probability for class

151

5.3. Generative Classifiers
Figure 5.12

Plot of the logistic sigmoid
function σ(a) defined by
(5.42), shown in red, together
with the scaled probit function
Φ(λa), for λ2 = π/8, shown
in dashed blue, where Φ(a)
is defined by (5.86). The
scaling factor π/8 is chosen
so that the derivatives of
the two curves are equal for
a = 0.

1

0.5

0

−5

0

5

C1 can be written as
p(C1 |x) =
=

p(x|C1 )p(C1 )
p(x|C1 )p(C1 ) + p(x|C2 )p(C2 )
1
= σ(a)
1 + exp(−a)

where we have defined
a = ln

p(x|C1 )p(C1 )
p(x|C2 )p(C2 )

(5.40)

(5.41)

and σ(a) is the logistic sigmoid function defined by
σ(a) =

1
,
1 + exp(−a)

(5.42)

which is plotted in Figure 5.12. The term ‘sigmoid’ means S-shaped. This type of
function is sometimes also called a ‘squashing function’ because it maps the whole
real axis into a finite interval. The logistic sigmoid has been encountered already
in earlier chapters and plays an important role in many classification algorithms. It
satisfies the following symmetry property:
σ(−a) = 1 − σ(a)
as is easily verified. The inverse of the logistic sigmoid is given by


σ
a = ln
1−σ

(5.43)

(5.44)

and is known as the logit function. It represents the log of the ratio of probabilities
ln [p(C1 |x)/p(C2 |x)] for the two classes, also known as the log odds.
Note that in (5.40), we have simply rewritten the posterior probabilities in an
equivalent form, and so the appearance of the logistic sigmoid may seem artificial.

