=== Page 150 (Book page ~131) ===
5
Single-layer
Networks:
Classiﬁcation
In the previous chapter, we explored a class of regression models in which the out-
put variables were linear functions of the model parameters and which can therefore
be expressed as simple neural networks having a single layer of weight and bias
parameters. We turn now to a discussion of classiﬁcation problems, and in this chap-
ter, we will focus on an analogous class of models that again can be expressed as
single-layer neural networks. These will allow us to introduce many of the key con-
cepts of classiﬁcation before dealing with more general deep neural networks in later
chapters.
The goal in classiﬁcation is to take an input vector x∈RDand assign it to one
ofKdiscrete classesCkwherek= 1;:::;K . In the most common scenario, the
classes are taken to be disjoint, so that each input is assigned to one and only one
class. The input space is thereby divided into decision regions whose boundaries are
called decision boundaries ordecision surfaces. In this chapter, we consider linear
131 © The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
C. M. Bishop, H. Bishop, Deep Learning , https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-45468-4_5    

=== Page 151 (Book page ~132) ===
132 5. SINGLE-LAYER NETWORKS: CLASSIFICATION
models for classiﬁcation, by which we mean that the decision surfaces are linear
functions of the input vector xand, hence, are deﬁned by (D−1)-dimensional
hyperplanes within the D-dimensional input space. Data sets whose classes can
be separated exactly by linear decision surfaces are said to be linearly separable.
Linear classiﬁcation models can be applied to data sets that are not linearly separable,
although not all inputs will be correctly classiﬁed.
We can broadly identify three distinct approaches to solving classiﬁcation prob-
lems. The simplest involves constructing a discriminant function that directly assigns
each vector xto a speciﬁc class. A more powerful approach, however, models the
conditional probability distributions p(Ck|x)in an inference stage and subsequently
uses these distributions to make optimal decisions. Separating inference and deci-
sion brings numerous beneﬁts. There are two different approaches to determining Section 5.2.4
the conditional probabilities p(Ck|x). One technique is to model them directly, for
example by representing them as parametric models and then optimizing the param-
eters using a training set. This will be called a discriminative probabilistic model.
Alternatively, we can model the class-conditional densities p(x|Ck), together with
the prior probabilities p(Ck)for the classes, and then compute the required posterior
probabilities using Bayes’ theorem:
p(Ck|x) =p(x|Ck)p(Ck)
p(x): (5.1)
This will be called a generative probabilistic model because it offers the opportunity
to generate samples from each of the class-conditional densities p(x|Ck). In this
chapter, we will discuss examples of all three approaches: discriminant functions,
generative probabilistic models, and discriminative probabilistic models.
5.1. Discriminant Functions
A discriminant is a function that takes an input vector xand assigns it to one of K
classes, denotedCk. In this chapter, we will restrict attention to linear discriminants,
namely those for which the decision surfaces are hyperplanes. To simplify the dis-
cussion, we consider ﬁrst two classes and then investigate the extension to K > 2
classes.
5.1.1 Two classes
The simplest representation of a linear discriminant function is obtained by tak-
ing a linear function of the input vector so that
y(x) = wTx+w0 (5.2)
where wis called a weight vector, and w0is abias (not to be confused with bias in
the statistical sense). An input vector xis assigned to class C1ify(x)>0and to
classC2otherwise. The corresponding decision boundary is therefore deﬁned by the
relationy(x) = 0 , which corresponds to a (D−1)-dimensional hyperplane within

=== Page 152 (Book page ~133) ===
5.1.
Discriminant Functions 133
Figure 5.1 Illustration of the geometry of
a linear discriminant function in two dimen-
sions. The decision surface, shown in red,
is perpendicular to w, and its displacement
from the origin is controlled by the bias pa-
rameterw0. Also, the signed orthogonal
distance of a general point xfrom the deci-
sion surface is given by y(x)=/bardblw/bardbl.
x2
x1wx
y(x)
/bardblw/bardbl
x⊥
−w0
/bardblw/bardbly=0
y
<0y > 0
R2R1
theD-dimensional
input space. Consider two points xAandxBboth of which lie on
the decision surface. Because y(xA) =y(xB) = 0 , we have wT(xA−xB) = 0 and
hence the vector wis orthogonal to every vector lying within the decision surface,
and so wdetermines the orientation of the decision surface. Similarly, if xis a point
on the decision surface, then y(x) = 0, and so the normal distance from the origin
to the decision surface is given by
wTx
/bardbl
w/bardbl=−w0
/bardbl
w/bardbl: (5.3)
We therefore see that the bias parameter w0determines the location of the decision
surface. These properties are illustrated for the case of D= 2inFigure 5.1.
Furthermore, note that the value of y(x)gives a signed measure of the perpen-
dicular distance rof the point xfrom the decision surface. To see this, consider an
arbitrary point xand let x⊥be its orthogonal projection onto the decision surface,
so that
x=x⊥+rw
/bardbl
w/bardbl: (5.4)
Multiplying both sides of this result by wTand addingw0, and making use of y(x) =
wTx+w0andy(x⊥) =wTx⊥+w0= 0, we have
r=y(x)
/bardbl
w/bardbl: (5.5)
This result is illustrated in Figure 5.1.
As with linear regression models, it is sometimes convenient to use a more com- Section 4.1.1
pact notation in which we introduce an additional dummy ‘input’ value x0= 1and
then deﬁne/tildewidew= (w0;w)and/tildewidex= (x0;x)so that
y(x) =/tildewidewT/tildewidex: (5.6)

=== Page 153 (Book page ~134) ===
134 5.
SINGLE-LAYER NETWORKS: CLASSIFICATION
R1
R2
R3?
C1
notC1C2
notC2
R1
R2R3
?C1
C2C1C3
C2C3
Figure
5.2 Attempting to construct a K-class discriminant from a set of two-class discriminant functions leads
to ambiguous regions, as shown in green. On the left is an example with two discriminant functions designed to
distinguish points in class Ckfrom points not in class Ck. On the right is an example involving three discriminant
functions each of which is used to separate a pair of classes CkandCj.
In this case, the decision surfaces are D-dimensional hyperplanes passing through
the origin of the (D+ 1)-dimensional expanded input space.
5.1.2 Multiple classes
Now consider the extension of linear discriminant functions to K > 2classes.
We might be tempted to build a K-class discriminant by combining a number of
two-class discriminant functions. However, this leads to some serious difﬁculties
(Duda and Hart, 1973), as we now show.
Consider a model with K−1classiﬁers, each of which solves a two-class prob-
lem of separating points in a particular class Ckfrom points not in that class. This
is known as a one-versus-the-rest classiﬁer. The left-hand example in Figure 5.2
shows an example involving three classes where this approach leads to regions of
input space that are ambiguously classiﬁed.
An alternative is to introduce K(K−1)=2 binary discriminant functions, one
for every possible pair of classes. This is known as a one-versus-one classiﬁer. Each
point is then classiﬁed according to a majority vote amongst the discriminant func-
tions. However, this too runs into the problem of ambiguous regions, as illustrated
in the right-hand diagram of Figure 5.2.
We can avoid these difﬁculties by considering a single K-class discriminant
comprisingKlinear functions of the form
yk(x) = wT
kx+wk0 (5.7)
and then assigning a point xto classCkifyk(x)>yj(x)for allj/negationslash=k. The decision
boundary between class Ckand classCjis therefore given by yk(x) =yj(x)and

=== Page 154 (Book page ~135) ===
5.1.
Discriminant Functions 135
Figure 5.3 Illustration of the decision regions for a
multi-class linear discriminant, with the
decision boundaries shown in red. If
two points xAandxBboth lie inside the
same decision region Rk, then any point
bxthat lies on the line connecting these
two points must also lie in Rk, and hence,
the decision region must be singly con-
nected and convex.
RiRj
Rk
xAxB
bx
hence
corresponds to a (D−1)-dimensional hyperplane deﬁned by
(wk−wj)Tx+ (wk0−wj0) = 0: (5.8)
This has the same form as the decision boundary for the two-class case discussed in
Section 5.1.1, and so analogous geometrical properties apply.
The decision regions of such a discriminant are always singly connected and
convex. To see this, consider two points xAandxBboth of which lie inside decision
regionRk, as illustrated in Figure 5.3. Any point /hatwidexthat lies on the line connecting
xAandxBcan be expressed in the form
/hatwidex=xA+ (1−)xB (5.9)
where 0661. From the linearity of the discriminant functions, it follows that
yk(/hatwidex) =yk(xA) + (1−)yk(xB): (5.10)
Because both xAandxBlie insideRk, it follows that yk(xA)> yj(xA)and that
yk(xB)>yj(xB), for allj/negationslash=k, and henceyk(/hatwidex)>yj(/hatwidex), and so/hatwidexalso lies inside
Rk. Thus,Rkis singly connected and convex.
Note that for two classes, we can either employ the formalism discussed here,
based on two discriminant functions y1(x)andy2(x), or else use the simpler but
essentially equivalent formulation based on a single discriminant function y(x). Section 5.1.1
5.1.3 1-of-K coding
For regression problems, the target variable twas simply the vector of real num-
bers whose values we wish to predict. In classiﬁcation, there are various ways of
using target values to represent class labels. For two-class problems, the most conve-
nient is the binary representation in which there is a single target variable t∈{0; 1}
such thatt= 1 represents classC1andt= 0 represents classC2. We can interpret
the value oftas the probability that the class is C1, with the probability values taking
only the extreme values of 0 and 1. For K > 2classes, it is convenient to use a
1-of-K coding scheme, also known as the one-hot encoding scheme, in which tis
a vector of length Ksuch that if the class is Cj, then all elements tkoftare zero

=== Page 155 (Book page ~136) ===
136 5. SINGLE-LAYER NETWORKS: CLASSIFICATION
except element tj, which takes the value 1. For instance, if we have K= 5classes,
then a data point from class 2would be given the target vector
t= (0;1;0;0;0)T: (5.11)
Again, we can interpret the value of tkas the probability that the class is Ckin which
the probabilities take only the values 0 and 1.
5.1.4 Least squares for classiﬁcation
With linear regression models, the minimization of a sum-of-squares error func-
tion leads to a simple closed-form solution for the parameter values. It is therefore Section 4.1.3
tempting to see if we can apply the same least-squares formalism to classiﬁcation
problems. Consider a general classiﬁcation problem with Kclasses and a 1-of-K
binary coding scheme for the target vector t. One justiﬁcation for using least squares
in such a context is that it approximates the conditional expectation E[t|x] of the
target values given the input vector. For a binary coding scheme, this conditional ex-
pectation is given by the vector of posterior class probabilities. Unfortunately, these Exercise 5.1
probabilities are typically approximated rather poorly, and indeed the approxima-
tions can have values outside the range (0;1). However, it is instructional to explore
these simple models and to understand how these limitations arise.
Each classCkis described by its own linear model so that
yk(x) = wT
kx+wk0 (5.12)
wherek= 1;:::;K . We can conveniently group these together using vector nota-
tion so that
y(x) =/tildewiderWT/tildewidex (5.13)
where/tildewiderWis a matrix whose kth column comprises the (D+ 1) -dimensional vector
/tildewidewk= (wk0;wT
k)Tand/tildewidexis the corresponding augmented input vector (1;xT)Twith
a dummy input x0= 1. A new input xis then assigned to the class for which the
outputyk=/tildewidewT
k/tildewidexis largest.
We now determine the parameter matrix /tildewiderWby minimizing a sum-of-squares
error function. Consider a training data set {xn;tn}wheren= 1;:::;N , and
deﬁne a matrix Twhosenth row is the vector tT
n, together with a matrix /tildewideXwhose
nth row is/tildewidexT
n. The sum-of-squares error function can then be written as
ED(/tildewiderW) =1
2Tr/braceleftBig
(/tildewideX/tildewiderW−T)T(/tildewideX/tildewiderW−T)/bracerightBig
: (5.14)
Setting the derivative with respect to /tildewiderWto zero and rearranging, we obtain the solu-
tion for/tildewiderWin the form
/tildewiderW= (/tildewideXT/tildewideX)−1/tildewideXTT=/tildewideX†T (5.15)
where/tildewideX†is the pseudo-inverse of the matrix /tildewideX. We then obtain the discriminant Section 4.1.3

=== Page 156 (Book page ~137) ===
5.1.
Discriminant Functions 137
function in the form
y(x) =/tildewiderWT/tildewidex=TT/parenleftBig
/tildewideX†/parenrightBigT
/tildewidex: (5.16)
An interesting property of least-squares solutions with multiple target variables
is that if every target vector in the training set satisﬁes some linear constraint
aTtn+b= 0 (5.17)
for some constants aandb, then the model prediction for any value of xwill satisfy
the same constraint so that Exercise 5.3
aTy(x) +b= 0: (5.18)
Thus, if we use a 1-of-K coding scheme for Kclasses, then the predictions made
by the model will have the property that the elements of y(x)will sum to 1 for any
value of x. However, this summation constraint alone is not sufﬁcient to allow the
model outputs to be interpreted as probabilities because they are not constrained to
lie within the interval (0;1).
The least-squares approach gives an exact closed-form solution for the discrim-
inant function parameters. However, even as a discriminant function (where we use
it to make decisions directly and dispense with any probabilistic interpretation), it
suffers from some severe problems. We have seen that the sum-of-squares error
function can be viewed as the negative log likelihood under the assumption of a
Gaussian noise distribution. If the true distribution of the data is markedly different Section 2.3.4
from being Gaussian, then least squares can give poor results. In particular, least
squares is very sensitive to the presence of outliers, which are data points located a
long way from the bulk of the data. This is illustrated in Figure 5.4. Here we see that
the additional data points in the right-hand ﬁgure produce a signiﬁcant change in the
location of the decision boundary, even though these points would be correctly clas-
siﬁed by the original decision boundary in the left-hand ﬁgure. The sum-of-squares
error function gives too much weight to data points that are a long way from the
decision boundary, even though they are correctly classiﬁed. Outliers can arise due
to rare events or may simply be due to mistakes in the data set. Techniques that are
sensitive to a very few data points are said to lack robustness. For comparison, Fig-
ure 5.4 also shows results from a technique called logistic regression, which is more Section 5.4.3
robust to outliers.
The failure of least squares should not surprise us when we recall that it cor-
responds to maximum likelihood under the assumption of a Gaussian conditional
distribution, whereas binary target vectors clearly have a distribution that is far from
Gaussian. By adopting more appropriate probabilistic models, we can obtain clas-
siﬁcation techniques with much better properties than least squares, and which can
also be generalized to give ﬂexible nonlinear neural network models, as we will see
in later chapters.

=== Page 157 (Book page ~138) ===
138 5. SINGLE-LAYER NETWORKS: CLASSIFICATION
−4 −2 0 2 4 6 8−8−6−4−2024
−4 −2 0 2 4 6 8−8−6−4−2024
Figure 5.4 The left-hand plot shows data from two classes, denoted by red crosses and blue circles, together
with the decision boundaries found by least squares (magenta curve) and by a logistic regression model (green
curve). The right-hand plot shows the corresponding results obtained when extra data points are added at the
bottom right of the diagram, showing that least squares is highly sensitive to outliers, unlike logistic regression.
5.2. Decision Theory
When we discussed linear regression we saw how the process of making predictions
in machine learning can be broken down into the two stages of inference and de-
cision. We now explore this perspective in much greater depth speciﬁcally in the Section 4.2
context of classiﬁers.
Suppose we have an input vector xtogether with a corresponding vector tof
target variables, and our goal is to predict tgiven a new value for x. For regression
problems, twill comprise continuous variables and in general will be a vector as
we may wish to predict several related quantities. For classiﬁcation problems, twill
represent class labels. Again, twill in general be a vector if we have more than
two classes. The joint probability distribution p(x;t)provides a complete summary
of the uncertainty associated with these variables. Determining p(x;t)from a set
of training data is an example of inference and is typically a very difﬁcult problem
whose solution forms the subject of much of this book. In a practical application,
however, we must often make a speciﬁc prediction for the value of tor more gen-
erally take a speciﬁc action based on our understanding of the values tis likely to
take, and this aspect is the subject of decision theory.
Consider, for example, our earlier medical diagnosis problem in which we have
taken an image of a skin lesion on a patient, and we wish to determine whether the
patient has cancer. In this case, the input vector xis the set of pixel intensities in

=== Page 158 (Book page ~139) ===
5.2. Decision Theory 139
the image, and the output variable twill represent the absence of cancer, which we
denote by the class C1, or the presence of cancer, which we denote by the class C2.
We might, for instance, choose tto be a binary variable such that t= 0corresponds
to classC1andt= 1 corresponds to class C2. We will see later that this choice of
label values is particularly convenient when working with probabilities. The gen-
eral inference problem then involves determining the joint distribution p(x;Ck), or
equivalently p(x;t), which gives us the most complete probabilistic description of
the variables. Although this can be a very useful and informative quantity, ultimately,
we must decide either to give treatment to the patient or not, and we would like this
choice to be optimal according to some appropriate criterion (Duda and Hart, 1973).
This is the decision step, and the aim of decision theory is that it should tell us how
to make optimal decisions given the appropriate probabilities. We will see that the
decision stage is generally very simple, even trivial, once we have solved the in-
ference problem. Here we give an introduction to the key ideas of decision theory
as required for the rest of the book. Further background, as well as more detailed
accounts, can be found in Berger (1985) and Bather (2000).
Before giving a more detailed analysis, let us ﬁrst consider informally how we
might expect probabilities to play a role in making decisions. When we obtain the
skin image xfor a new patient, our goal is to decide which of the two classes to assign
the image to. We are therefore interested in the probabilities of the two classes, given
the image, which are given by p(Ck|x). Using Bayes’ theorem, these probabilities
can be expressed in the form
p(Ck|x) =p(x|Ck)p(Ck)
p(x): (5.19)
Note that any of the quantities appearing in Bayes’ theorem can be obtained from
the joint distribution p(x;Ck)by either marginalizing or conditioning with respect to
the appropriate variables. We can now interpret p(Ck)as the prior probability for the
classCkandp(Ck|x)as the corresponding posterior probability. Thus, p(C1)repre-
sents the probability that a person has cancer, before the image is taken. Similarly,
p(C1|x)is the posterior probability, revised using Bayes’ theorem in light of the in-
formation contained in the image. If our aim is to minimize the chance of assigning
xto the wrong class, then intuitively we would choose the class having the higher
posterior probability. We now show that this intuition is correct, and we also discuss
more general criteria for making decisions.
5.2.1 Misclassiﬁcation rate
Suppose that our goal is simply to make as few misclassiﬁcations as possible.
We need a rule that assigns each value of xto one of the available classes. Such a
rule will divide the input space into regions Rkcalled decision regions, one for each
class, such that all points in Rkare assigned to class Ck. The boundaries between
decision regions are called decision boundaries ordecision surfaces. Note that each
decision region need not be contiguous but could comprise some number of disjoint
regions. To ﬁnd the optimal decision rule, consider ﬁrst the case of two classes, as in
the cancer problem, for instance. A mistake occurs when an input vector belonging

=== Page 159 (Book page ~140) ===
140 5.
SINGLE-LAYER NETWORKS: CLASSIFICATION
to classC1is assigned to class C2or vice versa. The probability of this occurring is
given by
p(mistake) = p(x∈R 1;C2) +p(x∈R 2;C1)
=/integraldisplay
R1p(x;C2) dx+/integraldisplay
R2p(x;C1) dx: (5.20)
We are free to choose the decision rule that assigns each point xto one of the
two classes. Clearly, to minimize p(mistake) we should arrange that each xis as-
signed to whichever class has the smaller value of the integrand in (5.20). Thus, if
p(x;C1)> p(x;C2)for a given value of x, then we should assign that xto class
C1. From the product rule of probability, we have p(x;Ck) =p(Ck|x)p(x). Because
the factorp(x) is common to both terms, we can restate this result as saying that
the minimum probability of making a mistake is obtained if each value of xis as-
signed to the class for which the posterior probability p(Ck|x)is largest. This result
is illustrated for two classes and a single input variable xinFigure 5.5.
For the more general case of Kclasses, it is slightly easier to maximize the
probability of being correct, which is given by
p(correct) =K/summationdisplay
k=1p(x∈Rk;Ck)
=K/summationdisplay
k=1/integraldisplay
Rkp(x;Ck) dx; (5.21)
which is maximized when the regions Rkare chosen such that each xis assigned
to the class for which p(x;Ck)is largest. Again, using the product rule p(x;Ck) =
p(Ck|x)p(x), and noting that the factor of p(x) is common to all terms, we see
that each xshould be assigned to the class having the largest posterior probability
p(Ck|x).
5.2.2 Expected loss
For many applications, our objective will be more complex than simply mini-
mizing the number of misclassiﬁcations. Let us consider again the medical diagnosis
problem. We note that, if a patient who does not have cancer is incorrectly diagnosed
as having cancer, the consequences may be that they experience some distress plus
there is the need for further investigations. Conversely, if a patient with cancer is
diagnosed as healthy, the result may be premature death due to lack of treatment.
Thus, the consequences of these two types of mistake can be dramatically different.
It would clearly be better to make fewer mistakes of the second kind, even if this was
at the expense of making more mistakes of the ﬁrst kind.
We can formalize such issues through the introduction of a loss function, also
called a cost function, which is a single, overall measure of loss incurred in taking
any of the available decisions or actions. Our goal is then to minimize the total loss
incurred. Note that some authors consider instead a utility function, whose value

=== Page 160 (Book page ~141) ===
5.2. Decision Theory 141
ˆx x0p(x,C1)
p(x,C2)R1 R2
(a)
ˆxp(x,C1)
p(x,C2)R1 R2
(b)
Figure 5.5 Schematic illustration of the joint probabilities p(x;Ck)for each of two classes plotted against x,
together with the decision boundary x=bx. Values of x>bxare classiﬁed as class C2and hence belong to
decision regionR2, whereas points x <bxare classiﬁed asC1and belong toR1. Errors arise from the blue,
green, and red regions, so that for x <bx, the errors are due to points from class C2being misclassiﬁed as C1
(represented by the sum of the red and green regions). Conversely for points in the region x>bx, the errors are
due to points from class C1being misclassiﬁed as C2(represented by the blue region). By varying the location
bxof the decision boundary, as indicated by the red double-headed arrow in (a), the combined areas of the blue
and green regions remains constant, whereas the size of the red region varies. The optimal choice for bxis where
the curves for p(x;C1)andp(x;C2)cross, as shown in (b) and corresponding to bx=x0, because in this case
the red region disappears. This is equivalent to the minimum misclassiﬁcation rate decision rule, which assigns
each value of xto the class having the higher posterior probability p(Ck|x).

=== Page 161 (Book page ~142) ===
142 5.
SINGLE-LAYER NETWORKS: CLASSIFICATION
Figure 5.6 An example of a loss matrix with elements
Lkjfor the cancer treatment problem. The rows cor-
respond to the true class, whereas the columns corre-
spond to the assignment of class made by our decision
criterion./parenleftbiggnormal cancer
normal 0 1
cancer 100 0/parenrightbigg
they aim to maximize. These are equivalent concepts if we take the utility to be
simply the negative of the loss. Throughout this text we will use the loss function
convention. Suppose that, for a new value of x, the true class isCkand that we assign
xto classCj(wherejmay or may not be equal to k). In so doing, we incur some
level of loss that we denote by Lkj, which we can view as the k;jelement of a loss
matrix. For instance, in our cancer example, we might have a loss matrix of the form
shown in Figure 5.6. This particular loss matrix says that there is no loss incurred if
the correct decision is made, there is a loss of 1if a healthy patient is diagnosed as
having cancer, whereas there is a loss of 100if a patient having cancer is diagnosed
as healthy.
The optimal solution is the one that minimizes the loss function. However, the
loss function depends on the true class, which is unknown. For a given input vector x,
our uncertainty in the true class is expressed through the joint probability distribution
p(x;Ck), and so we seek instead to minimize the average loss, where the average is
computed with respect to this distribution and is given by
E[L] =/summationdisplay
k/summationdisplay
j/integraldisplay
RjLkjp(x;Ck) dx: (5.22)
Eachxcan be assigned independently to one of the decision regions Rj. Our goal
is to choose the regions Rjto minimize the expected loss (5.22), which implies that
for each x, we should minimize/summationtext
kLkjp(x;Ck). As before, we can use the product
rulep(x;Ck) =p(Ck|x)p(x) to eliminate the common factor of p(x). Thus, the
decision rule that minimizes the expected loss assigns each new xto the classjfor
which the quantity/summationdisplay
kLkjp(Ck|x) (5.23)
is a minimum. Once we have chosen values for the loss matrix elements Lkj, this is
clearly trivial to do.
5.2.3 The reject option
We have seen that classiﬁcation errors arise from the regions of input space
where the largest of the posterior probabilities p(Ck|x)is signiﬁcantly less than unity
or equivalently where the joint distributions p(x;Ck)have comparable values. These
are the regions where we are relatively uncertain about class membership. In some
applications, it will be appropriate to avoid making decisions on the difﬁcult cases
in anticipation of obtaining a lower error rate on those examples for which a classi-
ﬁcation decision is made. This is known as the reject option. For example, in our
hypothetical cancer screening example, it may be appropriate to use an automatic

=== Page 162 (Book page ~143) ===
5.2.
Decision Theory 143
Figure 5.7 Illustration of the reject option. Inputs
xsuch that the larger of the two poste-
rior probabilities is less than or equal to
some threshold will be rejected.
xp(C1jx) p(C2jx)
0:01:0

reject region
system
to classify those images for which there is little doubt as to the correct class,
while requesting a biopsy to classify the more ambiguous cases. We can achieve this
by introducing a threshold and rejecting those inputs xfor which the largest of
the posterior probabilities p(Ck|x)is less than or equal to . This is illustrated for
two classes and a single continuous input variable xinFigure 5.7. Note that setting
= 1will ensure that all examples are rejected, whereas if there are Kclasses, then
setting < 1=K will ensure that no examples are rejected. Thus, the fraction of
examples that are rejected is controlled by the value of .
We can easily extend the reject criterion to minimize the expected loss, when a
loss matrix is given, by taking account of the loss incurred when a reject decision is
made. Exercise 5.10
5.2.4 Inference and decision
We have broken the classiﬁcation problem down into two separate stages, the
inference stage in which we use training data to learn a model for p(Ck|x)and the
subsequent decision stage in which we use these posterior probabilities to make op-
timal class assignments. An alternative possibility would be to solve both problems
together and simply learn a function that maps inputs xdirectly into decisions. Such
a function is called a discriminant function.
In fact, we can identify three distinct approaches to solving decision problems,
all of which have been used in practical applications. These are, in decreasing order
of complexity, as follows:
(a)First, solve the inference problem of determining the class-conditional den-
sitiesp(x|Ck)for each classCkindividually. Separately infer the prior class
probabilities p(Ck). Then use Bayes’ theorem in the form
p(Ck|x) =p(x|Ck)p(Ck)
p
(x)(5.24)
to ﬁnd the posterior class probabilities p(Ck|x). As usual, the denominator in

=== Page 163 (Book page ~144) ===
144 5.
SINGLE-LAYER NETWORKS: CLASSIFICATION
Bayes’ theorem can be found in terms of the quantities in the numerator, using
p(x) =/summationdisplay
kp(x|Ck)p(Ck): (5.25)
Equivalently, we can model the joint distribution p(x;Ck)directly and then
normalize to obtain the posterior probabilities. Having found the posterior
probabilities, we use decision theory to determine the class membership for
each new input x. Approaches that explicitly or implicitly model the distribu-
tion of inputs as well as outputs are known as generative models, because by
sampling from them, it is possible to generate synthetic data points in the input
space.
(b)First, solve the inference problem of determining the posterior class probabili-
tiesp(Ck|x), and then subsequently use decision theory to assign each new xto
one of the classes. Approaches that model the posterior probabilities directly
are called discriminative models.
(c)Find a function f(x), called a discriminant function, that maps each input x
directly onto a class label. For instance, for two-class problems, f(·)might be
binary valued and such that f= 0 represents classC1andf= 1 represents
classC2. In this case, probabilities play no role.
Let us consider the relative merits of these three alternatives. Approach (a) is the
most demanding because it involves ﬁnding the joint distribution over both xand
Ck. For many applications, xwill have high dimensionality, and consequently, we
may need a large training set to be able to determine the class-conditional densities to
reasonable accuracy. Note that the class priors p(Ck)can often be estimated simply
from the fractions of the training set data points in each of the classes. One advantage
of approach (a), however, is that it also allows the marginal density of data p(x) to
be determined from (5.25). This can be useful for detecting new data points that
have low probability under the model and for which the predictions may be of low
accuracy, which is known as outlier detection ornovelty detection (Bishop, 1994;
Tarassenko, 1995).
However, if we wish only to make classiﬁcation decisions, then it can be waste-
ful of computational resources and excessively demanding of data to ﬁnd the joint
distribution p(x;Ck)when in fact we really need only the posterior probabilities
p(Ck|x), which can be obtained directly through approach (b). Indeed, the class-
conditional densities may contain a signiﬁcant amount of structure that has little ef-
fect on the posterior probabilities, as illustrated in Figure 5.8. There has been much
interest in exploring the relative merits of generative and discriminative approaches
to machine learning and in ﬁnding ways to combine them (Jebara, 2004; Lasserre,
Bishop, and Minka, 2006).
An even simpler approach is (c) in which we use the training data to ﬁnd a
discriminant function f(x)that maps each xdirectly onto a class label, thereby
combining the inference and decision stages into a single learning problem. In the
example of Figure 5.8, this would correspond to ﬁnding the value of xshown by