
=== PDF PAGE 216 (Book Page 198) ===
198

6. DEEP NEURAL NETWORKS
In summary, there is a natural choice of both output-unit activation function
and matching error function according to the type of problem being solved. For
regression, we use linear outputs and a sum-of-squares error, for multiple independent binary classifications, we use logistic sigmoid outputs and a cross-entropy error
function, and for multi-class classification, we use softmax outputs with the corresponding multi-class cross-entropy error function. For classification problems involving two classes, we can use a single logistic sigmoid output, or alternatively, we
can use a network with two outputs having a softmax output activation function.
This procedure is quite general, and by considering other forms of conditional
distribution, we can derive the associated error functions as the corresponding negative log likelihood. We will see an example of this in the next section when we
consider multimodal network outputs.

6.5. Mixture Density Networks
So far in this chapter we have discussed neural networks whose outputs represent
simple probability distributions comprising either a Gaussian for continuous variables or a binary distribution for discrete variables. We close the chapter by showing
how a neural network can represent more general conditional probabilities by treating the outputs of the network as the parameters of a more complex distribution, in
this case a Gaussian mixture model. This is known as a mixture density network,
and we will see how to define the associated error function and the corresponding
output-unit activation functions.

6.5.1

Exercise 6.16

Robot kinematics example

The goal of supervised learning is to model a conditional distribution p(t|x),
which for many simple regression problems is chosen to be Gaussian. However,
practical machine learning problems can often have significantly non-Gaussian distributions. These can arise, for example, with inverse problems in which the distribution can be multimodal, in which case the Gaussian assumption can lead to very
poor predictions.
As a simple illustration of an inverse problem, consider the kinematics of a robot
arm, as illustrated in Figure 6.16. The forward problem involves finding the end effector position given the joint angles and has a unique solution. However, in practice
we wish to move the end effector of the robot to a specific position, and to do this we
must set appropriate joint angles. We therefore need to solve the inverse problem,
which has two solutions, as seen in Figure 6.16.
Forward problems often correspond to causality in a physical system and generally have a unique solution. For instance, a specific pattern of symptoms in the
human body may be caused by the presence of a particular disease. In machine
learning, however, we typically have to solve an inverse problem, such as trying to
predict the presence of a disease given a set of symptoms. If the forward problem
involves a many-to-one mapping, then the inverse problem will have multiple solutions. For instance, several different diseases may result in the same symptoms.


=== PDF PAGE 217 (Book Page 199) ===
6.5. Mixture Density Networks
Figure 6.16 (a) A two-link robot
arm, in which the Cartesian coordinates (x1 , x2 ) of the end effector
are determined uniquely by the two
joint angles θ1 and θ2 and the (fixed)
lengths L1 and L2 of the arms. This
is known as the forward kinematics
of the arm. (b) In practice, we have
to find the joint angles that will give
rise to a desired end effector position. This inverse kinematics has
two solutions corresponding to ‘elbow up’ and ‘elbow down’.

(x1 , x2 )

L2

199

(x1 , x2 )

θ2
elbow
up

L1

elbow
down

θ1
(a)

(b)

In the robotics example, the kinematics is defined by geometrical equations, and
the multimodality is readily apparent. However, in many machine learning problems
the presence of multimodality, particularly in problems involving spaces of high dimensionality, can be less obvious. For tutorial purposes, however, we will consider
a simple toy problem for which we can easily visualize the multimodality. The data
for this problem is generated by sampling a variable x uniformly over the interval
(0, 1), to give a set of values {xn }, and the corresponding target values tn are obtained by computing the function xn + 0.3 sin(2πxn ) and then adding uniform noise
over the interval (−0.1, 0.1). The inverse problem is then obtained by keeping the
same data points but exchanging the roles of x and t. Figure 6.17 shows the data sets
for the forward and inverse problems, along with the results of fitting two-layer neural networks having six hidden units and a single linear output unit by minimizing
a sum-of-squares error function. Least squares corresponds to maximum likelihood
under a Gaussian assumption. We see that this leads to a good model for the forward
problem but a very poor model for the highly non-Gaussian inverse problem.

6.5.2

Conditional mixture distributions

We therefore seek a general framework for modelling conditional probability
distributions. This can be achieved by using a mixture model for p(t|x) in which
Figure 6.17 On the left is the data
set for a simple forward problem in
which the red curve shows the result
of fitting a two-layer neural network
by minimizing the sum-of-squares
error function. The corresponding
inverse problem, shown on the right,
is obtained by exchanging the roles
of x and t. Here the same network,
again trained by minimizing the sumof-squares error function, gives a
poor fit to the data due to the multimodality of the data set.

1

1

0

0
0

1

0

1


=== PDF PAGE 218 (Book Page 200) ===
6. DEEP NEURAL NETWORKS

p(t|x)
xD

θK

x1

...

θ

...

Figure 6.18 The mixture density network can represent general conditional
probability densities p(t|x) by considering a parametric mixture model for
the distribution of t whose parameters
are determined by the outputs of a neural network that takes x as its input
vector.

...

200

θ1
t

both the mixing coefficients as well as the component densities are flexible functions
of the input vector x, giving rise to a mixture density network. For any given value of
x, the mixture model provides a general formalism for modelling an arbitrary conditional density function p(t|x). Provided we consider a sufficiently flexible network,
we then have a framework for approximating arbitrary conditional distributions.
Here we will develop the model explicitly for Gaussian components, so that
p(t|x) =

K
X


πk (x)N t|µk (x), σk2 (x) .

(6.38)

k=1

This is an example of a heteroscedastic model in which the noise variance on the
data is a function of the input vector x. Instead of Gaussians, we can use other distributions for the components, such as Bernoulli distributions if the target variables
are binary rather than continuous. We have also specialized to the case of isotropic
covariances for the components, although the mixture density network can readily
be extended to allow for general covariance matrices by representing the covariances
using a Cholesky factorization (Williams, 1996). Even with isotropic components,
the conditional distribution p(t|x) does not assume factorization with respect to the
components of t (in contrast to the standard sum-of-squares regression model) as a
consequence of the mixture distribution.
We now take the various parameters of the mixture model, namely the mixing coefficients πk (x), the means µk (x), and the variances σk2 (x), to be governed
by the outputs of a neural network that takes x as its input. The structure of this
mixture density network is illustrated in Figure 6.18. The mixture density network
is closely related to the mixture-of-experts model (Jacobs et al., 1991). The principal difference is that a mixture of experts has independent parameters for each
component model in the mixture, whereas in a mixture density network, the same
function is used to predict the parameters of all the component densities as well as
the mixing coefficients, and so the nonlinear hidden units are shared amongst the
input-dependent functions.
The neural network in Figure 6.18 can, for example, be a two-layer network
having sigmoidal (tanh) hidden units. If there are K components in the mixture
model (6.38), and if t has L components, then the network will have K output-


=== PDF PAGE 219 (Book Page 201) ===
6.5. Mixture Density Networks

201

unit pre-activations denoted by aπk that determine the mixing coefficients πk (x), K
outputs denoted by aσk that determine the Gaussian standard deviations σk (x), and
K ×L outputs denoted by aµkj that determine the components µkj (x) of the Gaussian
means µk (x). The total number of network outputs is given by (L + 2)K, unlike
the usual L outputs for a network that simply predicts the conditional means of the
target variables.
The mixing coefficients must satisfy the constraints
K
X

πk (x) = 1,

0 ⩽ πk (x) ⩽ 1,

(6.39)

k=1

which can be achieved using a set of softmax outputs:
exp(aπk )
πk (x) = PK
.
π
l=1 exp(al )

(6.40)

Similarly, the variances must satisfy σk2 (x) ⩾ 0 and so can be represented in terms
of the exponentials of the corresponding network pre-activations using
σk (x) = exp(aσk ).

(6.41)

Finally, because the means µk (x) have real components, they can be represented
directly by the network outputs:
µkj (x) = aµkj

(6.42)

in which the output-unit activation functions are given by the identity f (a) = a.
The learnable parameters of the mixture density network comprise the vector w
of weights and biases in the neural network, which can be set by maximum likelihood
or equivalently by minimizing an error function defined to be the negative logarithm
of the likelihood. For independent data, this error function takes the form
(K
)
N
X
X

2
E(w) = −
ln
πk (xn , w)N tn |µk (xn , w), σk (xn , w)
(6.43)
n=1

k=1

where we have made the dependencies on w explicit.

6.5.3

Chapter 8

Gradient optimization

To minimize the error function, we need to calculate the derivatives of the error
E(w) with respect to the components of w. We will see later how to compute these
derivatives automatically. It is instructive, however, to derive suitable expressions for
the derivatives of the error with respect to the output-unit pre-activations explicitly as
this highlights the probabilistic interpretation of these quantities. Because the error
function (6.43) is composed of a sum of terms, one for each training data point, we
can consider the derivatives for a particular input vector xn with associated target
vector tn . The derivatives of the total error E are obtained by summing over all


=== PDF PAGE 220 (Book Page 202) ===
202

6. DEEP NEURAL NETWORKS

Chapter 7

data points, or the individual gradients for each data point can be used directly in
gradient-based optimization algorithms.
It is convenient to introduce the following variables:
πk Nnk
γnk = γk (tn |xn ) = PK
l=1 πl Nnl

Exercise 6.17
Exercise 6.18

where Nnk denotes N (tn |µk (xn ), σk2 (xn )). These quantities have a natural interpretation as posterior probabilities for the components of the mixture in which the
mixing coefficients πk (x) are viewed as x-dependent prior probabilities.
The derivatives of the error function with respect to the network output preactivations governing the mixing coefficients are given by
∂En
= πk − γnk .
∂aπk

Exercise 6.19

Exercise 6.20

(6.44)

(6.45)

Similarly, the derivatives with respect to the output pre-activations controlling the
component means are given by


∂En
µkl − tnl
.
(6.46)
= γnk
∂aµkl
σk2
Finally, the derivatives with respect to the output pre-activations controlling the component variances are given by


ktn − µk k2
∂En
.
(6.47)
=
γ
L
−
nk
∂aσk
σk2

6.5.4 Predictive distribution
We illustrate the use of a mixture density network by returning to the toy example of an inverse problem shown in Figure 6.17. Plots of the mixing coefficients πk (x), the means µk (x), and the conditional density contours corresponding
to p(t|x), are shown in Figure 6.19. The outputs of the neural network, and hence the
parameters in the mixture model, are necessarily continuous single-valued functions
of the input variables. However, we see from Figure 6.19(c) that the model is able to
produce a conditional density that is unimodal for some values of x and trimodal for
other values by modulating the amplitudes of the mixing components πk (x).
Once a mixture density network has been trained, it can predict the conditional
density function of the target data for any given value of the input vector. This
conditional density represents a complete description of the generator of the data, so
far as the problem of predicting the value of the output vector is concerned. From this
density function, we can calculate more specific quantities that may be of interest in
different applications. One of the simplest of these is the mean, corresponding to the
conditional average of the target data, and is given by
Z
E [t|x] =

tp(t|x) dt =

K
X
k=1

πk (x)µk (x)

(6.48)


=== PDF PAGE 221 (Book Page 203) ===
203

6.5. Mixture Density Networks
Figure 6.19 (a) Plot of the mixing
coefficients πk (x) as a function of
x for the three mixture components
in a mixture density network trained
on the data shown in Figure 6.17.
The model has three Gaussian components and uses a two-layer neural network with five tanh sigmoidal
units in the hidden layer and nine
outputs (corresponding to the three
means and three variances of the
Gaussian components and the three
mixing coefficients). At both small
and large values of x, where the
conditional probability density of the
target data is unimodal, only one
of the Gaussian components has
a high value for its prior probability, whereas at intermediate values
of x, where the conditional density
is trimodal, the three mixing coefficients have comparable values. (b)
Plots of the means µk (x) using the
same colour coding as for the mixing coefficients. (c) Plot of the contours of the corresponding conditional probability density of the target data for the same mixture density network. (d) Plot of the approximate conditional mode, shown
by the red points, of the conditional
density.

Exercise 6.21

1

1

0

0
0

1

0

(a)

(b)

1

1

0

0
0

1

1

0

(c)

1
(d)

where we have used (6.38). Because a standard network trained by least squares
approximates the conditional mean, we see that a mixture density network can reproduce the conventional least-squares result as a special case. Of course, as we have
already noted, for a multimodal distribution the conditional mean is of limited value.
We can similarly evaluate the variance of the density function about the conditional average, to give
h
i
2
s2 (x) = E kt − E[t|x]k |x
(6.49)


2
K
K


X
X
2
(6.50)
πl (x)µl (x)
πk (x) σk (x) + µk (x) −
=


k=1

l=1

where we have used (6.38) and (6.48). This is more general than the corresponding
least-squares result because the variance is a function of x.
We have seen that for multimodal distributions, the conditional mean can give
a poor representation of the data. For instance, in controlling the simple robot arm
shown in Figure 6.16, we need to pick one of the two possible joint angle settings


=== PDF PAGE 222 (Book Page 204) ===
204

6. DEEP NEURAL NETWORKS
to achieve the desired end-effector location, but the average of the two solutions is
not itself a solution. In such cases, the conditional mode may be of more value.
Because the conditional mode for the mixture density network does not have a simple analytical solution, a numerical iteration is required. A simple alternative is to
take the mean of the most probable component (i.e., the one with the largest mixing
coefficient) at each value of x. This is shown for the toy data set in Figure 6.19(d).

Exercises

6.1 (? ? ?) Use the result (2.126) to derive an expression for the surface area SD and
the volume VD of a hypersphere of unit radius in D dimensions. To do this, consider the following result, which is obtained by transforming from Cartesian to polar
coordinates:
Z ∞
D Z ∞
Y
2
−x2i
e
dxi = SD
e−r rD−1 dr.
(6.51)
i=1

−∞

0

Using the gamma function, defined by
Z ∞
Γ(x) =
tx−1 e−t dt

(6.52)

0

together with (2.126), evaluate both sides of this equation, and hence show that
SD =

2π D/2
.
Γ(D/2)

(6.53)

Next, by integrating with respect to the radius from 0 to 1, show that the volume of
the unit hypersphere in D dimensions is given by
VD =

SD
.
D

(6.54)

√
Finally, use the results Γ(1) = 1 and Γ(3/2) = π/2 to show that (6.53) and (6.54)
reduce to the usual expressions for D = 2 and D = 3.
6.2 (? ? ?) Consider a hypersphere of radius a in D dimensions together with the concentric hypercube of side 2a, so that the hypersphere touches the hypercube at the
centres of each of its sides. By using the results of Exercise 6.1, show that the ratio
of the volume of the hypersphere to the volume of the cube is given by
volume of hypersphere
π D/2
.
=
D−
volume of cube
D2 1 Γ(D/2)

(6.55)

Now make use of Stirling’s formula in the form
Γ(x + 1) ≃ (2π)1/2 e−x xx+1/2 ,

(6.56)

which is valid for x  1, to show that, as D → ∞, the ratio (6.55) goes to zero.
Show also that the distance from the centre of the hypercube to one of the corners


=== PDF PAGE 223 (Book Page 205) ===
Exercises

205

√
divided by the perpendicular distance to one of the sides is D, which therefore goes
to ∞ as D → ∞. From these results, we see that, in a space of high dimensionality,
most of the volume of a cube is concentrated in the large number of corners, which
themselves become very long ‘spikes’!
6.3 (? ? ?) In this exercise, we explore the behaviour of the Gaussian distribution in highdimensional spaces. Consider a Gaussian distribution in D dimensions given by


1
kxk2
p(x) =
exp − 2 .
(6.57)
2σ
(2πσ 2 )D/2
We wish to find the density as a function of the radius in polar coordinates in which
the direction variables have been integrated out. To do this, show that the integral of
the probability density over a thin shell of radius r and thickness , where   1, is
given by p(r) where


r2
SD rD−1
(6.58)
exp − 2
p(r) =
2σ
(2πσ 2 )D/2
where SD is the surface area of a unit hypersphere in D dimensions. Show
√ that the
function p(r) has a single stationary point located, for large D, at b
r ≃ Dσ. By
considering p(b
r + ) where   b
r, show that for large D,


32
(6.59)
p(b
r + ) = p(b
r) exp − 2 ,
2σ
which shows that b
r is a maximum of the radial probability density and also that p(r)
decays exponentially away from its maximum at b
r with length scale σ. We have
already seen that σ  b
r for large D, and so we see that most of the probability
mass is concentrated in a thin shell at large radius. Finally, show that the probability
density p(x) is larger at the origin than at the radius b
r by a factor of exp(D/2).
We therefore see that most of the probability mass in a high-dimensional Gaussian
distribution is located at a different radius from the region of high probability density.
6.4 (? ?) Consider a two-layer network function of the form (6.11) in which the hiddenunit nonlinear activation functions h(·) are given by logistic sigmoid functions of the
form
−1
σ(a) = {1 + exp(−a)} .
(6.60)
Show that there exists an equivalent network, which computes exactly the same function, but with hidden-unit activation functions given by tanh(a) where the tanh function is defined by (6.14). Hint: first find the relation between σ(a) and tanh(a), and
then show that the parameters of the two networks differ by linear transformations.
6.5 (? ?) The swish activation function (Ramachandran, Zoph, and Le, 2017) is defined
by
h(x) = xσ(βx)
(6.61)

