
=== PDF PAGE 189 (Book Page 171) ===
6
Deep Neural
Networks
In recent years, neural networks have emerged as, by far, the most important ma-
chine learning technology for practical applications, and we therefore devote a large
fraction of this book to studying them. Previous chapters have already laid many
of the foundations we will need. In particular, we have seen that linear regression
models that comprise linear combinations of ﬁxed nonlinear basis functions can be
expressed as neural networks having a single layer of weight and bias parameters. Chapter 4
Likewise, classiﬁcation models based on linear combinations of basis functions can
also be viewed as single-layer neural networks. These allowed us to introduce several Chapter 5
important concepts before we embark on a discussion of more complex multilayered
networks in this chapter.
Given a sufﬁcient number of suitably chosen basis functions, such linear models
can approximate any given nonlinear transformation from inputs to outputs to any
desired accuracy and might therefore appear to be sufﬁcient to tackle any practical
171 © The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
C. M. Bishop, H. Bishop, Deep Learning , https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-45468-4_6    
=== PDF PAGE 190 (Book Page 172) ===
172 6. DEEP NEURAL NETWORKS
application. However, these models have some severe limitations, and so we will
begin our discussion of neural networks by exploring these limitations and under-
standing why it is necessary to use basis functions that are themselves learned from
data. This leads naturally to a discussion of neural networks having more than one
layer of learnable parameters. These are known as feed-forward networks ormulti- Section 6.3.6
layer perceptrons. We will also discuss the beneﬁts of having many such layers of
processing, leading to the key concept of deep neural networks that now dominate
the ﬁeld of machine learning.
6.1. Limitations of Fixed Basis Functions
Linear basis function models for classiﬁcation are based on linear combinations of Chapter 5
basis functions j(x)and take the form
y(x;w) =f
M/summationdisplay
j=1wjj(x) +w0
 (6.1)
wheref(·)is a nonlinear output activation function. Linear models for regression
take the same form but with f(·)replaced by the identity. These models allow for Chapter 4
an arbitrary set of nonlinear basis functions {i(x)}, and because of the generality
of these basis functions, such models can in principle provide a solution to any re-
gression or classiﬁcation problem. This is true in a trivial sense in that if one of the
basis functions corresponds to the desired input-to-output transformation, then the
learnable linear layer simply has to copy the value of this basis function to the output
of the model.
More generally, we would expect that a sufﬁciently large and rich set of basis
functions would allow any desired function to be approximated to arbitrary accu-
racy. It would seem therefore that such linear models constitute a general purpose
framework for solving problems in machine learning. Unfortunately, there are some
signiﬁcant shortcomings with linear models, which arise from the assumption that
the basis functions j(x)are ﬁxed and independent of the training data. To under-
stand these limitations, we start by looking at the behaviour of linear models as the
number of input variables is increased.
6.1.1 The curse of dimensionality
Consider a simple regression model for a single input variable given by a poly-
nomial of order Min the form Section 1.2
y(x;w) =w0+w1x+w2x2+:::+wMxM(6.2)
and let us see what happens if we increase the number of inputs. If we have Dinput
variables{x1;:::;xD}, then a general polynomial with coefﬁcients up to order 3
=== PDF PAGE 191 (Book Page 173) ===
6.1.
Limitations of Fixed Basis Functions 173
Figure 6.1 Plot of the Iris data in which red,
green, and blue points denote
three species of iris ﬂower and the
axes represent measurements of
the length and width of the sepal,
respectively. Our goal is to clas-
sify a new test point such as the
one denoted by .
sepal lengthsepal width
w
ould take the form
y(x;w) =w0+D/summationdisplay
i=1wixi+D/summationdisplay
i=1D/summationdisplay
j=1wijxixj+D/summationdisplay
i=1D/summationdisplay
j=1D/summationdisplay
k=1wijkxixjxk:(6.3)
AsDincreases, the growth in the number of independent coefﬁcients is O(D3),
whereas for a polynomial of order M, the growth in the number of coefﬁcients is
O(DM)(Bishop, 2006). We see that in spaces of higher dimensionality, polynomials
can rapidly become unwieldy and of little practical utility.
The severe difﬁculties that can arise in spaces of many dimensions is sometimes
called the curse of dimensionality (Bellman, 1961). It is not limited to polynomial
regression but is in fact quite general. Consider the use of linear models for solv-
ing classiﬁcation problems. Figure 6.1 shows a plot of data from the Iris data set
comprising 50 observations taken from each of three species of iris ﬂowers. Each
observation has four variables representing measurements of the sepal length, sepal
width, petal length, and petal width. For this illustration, we consider only the sepal
length and sepal width variables. Given these 150 observations as training data, our
goal is to classify a new test point, such as the one denoted by the cross in Figure 6.1,
by assigning it to one of the three species. We observe that the cross is close to sev-
eral red points, and so we might suppose that it belongs to the red class. However,
there are also some green points nearby, so we might think that it could instead be-
long to the green class. It seems less likely that it belongs to the blue class. The
intuition here is that the identity of the cross should be determined more strongly by
nearby points from the training set and less strongly by more distant points, and this
intuition turns out to be reasonable.
One very simple way of converting this intuition into a learning algorithm would
be to divide the input space into regular cells, as indicated in Figure 6.2. When we
are given a test point and we wish to predict its class, we ﬁrst decide which cell it
=== PDF PAGE 192 (Book Page 174) ===
174 6.
DEEP NEURAL NETWORKS
Figure 6.2 Illustration of a simple approach
for solving classiﬁcation problems
in which the input space is di-
vided into cells and any new test
point is assigned to the class that
has the most representatives in
the same cell as the test point.
As we shall see shortly, this sim-
plistic approach has some severe
shortcomings.
sepal lengthsepal width
belongs
to, and then we ﬁnd all the training data points that fall in the same cell. The
identity of the test point is predicted to be the same as the class having the largest
number of training points in the same cell as the test point (with ties being broken
at random). We can view this as a basis function model in which there is a basis
functioni(x)for each grid cell, which simply returns zero if xlies outside the
grid cell, and otherwise returns the majority class of the training data points that fall
inside the cell. The output of the model is then given by the sum of the outputs of all
the basis functions.
There are numerous problems with this naive approach, but one of the most
severe becomes apparent when we consider its extension to problems having larger
numbers of input variables, corresponding to input spaces of higher dimensionality.
The origin of the problem is illustrated in Figure 6.3, which shows that, if we divide a
region of a space into regular cells, then the number of such cells grows exponentially
with the dimensionality of the space. The challenge with an exponentially large
number of cells is that we would need an exponentially large quantity of training
Figure 6.3 Illustration of the curse
of dimensionality, showing how the
number of regions of a regular grid
grows exponentially with the dimen-
sionalityDof the space. For clarity,
only a subset of the cubical regions
are shown for D= 3.
x1
D=1
x1x2
D=2
x1x2
x3
D=3
=== PDF PAGE 193 (Book Page 175) ===
6.1.
Limitations of Fixed Basis Functions 175
Figure 6.4 Plot of the fraction of the volume
of a hypersphere of radius r= 1
lying in the range r= 1−to
r= 1for various values of the di-
mensionality D.
/epsilon1volume fractionD= 1D=
2D= 5D= 20
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 100.20.40.60.81
data
to ensure that the cells are not empty. We have already seen in Figure 6.2 that
some cells contain no training points. Hence, a test point in such cells cannot be
classiﬁed. Clearly, we have no hope of applying such a technique in a space of more
than a few variables. The difﬁculties with both the polynomial regression example
and the Iris data classiﬁcation example arise because the basis functions were chosen
independently of the problem being solved. We will need to be more sophisticated
in our choice of basis functions if we are to circumvent the curse of dimensionality. Section 6.1.4
6.1.2 High-dimensional spaces
First, however, we will look more closely at the properties of spaces with higher
dimensionality where our geometrical intuitions, formed through a life spent in a
space of three dimensions, can fail badly. As a simple example, consider a hyper-
sphere of radius r= 1 in a space of Ddimensions, and ask what is the fraction of
the volume of the hypersphere that lies between radius r= 1−andr= 1. We can
evaluate this fraction by noting that the volume VD(r)of a hypersphere of radius r
inDdimensions must scale as rD, and so we write
VD(r) =KDrD(6.4)
where the constant KDdepends only on D. Thus, the required fraction is given by Exercise 6.1
VD(1)−VD(1−)
VD(1)=
1−(1−)D; (6.5)
which is plotted as a function of for various values of DinFigure 6.4. We see that,
for largeD, this fraction tends to 1even for small values of . Thus, we arrive at
the remarkable result that, in spaces of high dimensionality, most of the volume of a
hypersphere is concentrated in a thin shell near the surface!
=== PDF PAGE 194 (Book Page 176) ===
176 6.
DEEP NEURAL NETWORKS
Figure 6.5 Plot of the probability density with
respect to radius rof a Gaussian
distribution for various values of
the dimensionality D. In a high-
dimensional space, most of the
probability mass of a Gaussian
is located within a thin shell at a
speciﬁc radius.
D= 1
D= 2
D= 20
rp(r)
0 2 4012
As
a further example of direct relevance to machine learning, consider the be-
haviour of a Gaussian distribution in a high-dimensional space. If we transform from
Cartesian to polar coordinates and then integrate out the directional variables, we ob-
tain an expression for the density p(r)as a function of radius rfrom the origin. Thus, Exercise 6.3
p(r)ris the probability mass inside a thin shell of thickness rlocated at radius r.
This distribution is plotted, for various values of D, inFigure 6.5, and we see that
for largeD, the probability mass of the Gaussian is concentrated in a thin shell at a
speciﬁc radius.
In this book, we make extensive use of illustrative examples involving one or two
variables, because this makes it particularly easy to visualize these spaces graphi-
cally. The reader should be warned, however, that not all intuitions developed in
spaces of low dimensionality will generalize to situations involving many dimen-
sions.
Finally, although we have talked about the curse of dimensionality, there can
also be advantages to working in high-dimensional spaces. Consider the situation
shown in Figure 6.6. We see that this data set, in which each data point consists
of a pair of values (x1;x2), is linearly separable, but when only the value of x1is
observed, the classes have a strong overlap. The classiﬁcation problem is therefore
much easier in the higher-dimensional space.
6.1.3 Data manifolds
With both the polynomial regression model and the grid-based classiﬁer in Fig-
ure 6.2, we saw that the number of basis functions grows rapidly with dimensionality,
making such methods impractical for applications involving even a few dozen vari-
ables, never mind the millions of inputs that often arise with, say, image processing.
The problem is that the basis functions are ﬁxed ahead of time and do not depend on
the data, or indeed even on the speciﬁc problem being solved. We need to ﬁnd a way
to create basis functions that are tuned to the particular application.
Although the curse of dimensionality certainly raises important issues for ma-
chine learning applications, it does not prevent us from ﬁnding effective techniques
applicable to high-dimensional spaces. One reason for this is that real data will
generally be conﬁned to a region of the data space having lower effective dimen-
=== PDF PAGE 195 (Book Page 177) ===
6.1. Limitations of Fixed Basis Functions 177
x1x2
(a)
x1 (b)
Figure 6.6 Illustration of a data set in two dimensions (x1;x2)in which data points from the two classes de-
picted using green and red circles can be separated by a linear decision surface, as seen in (a). If, however, only
the variable x1is measured then the classes are no longer separable, as seen in (b).
sionality. Consider the images shown in Figure 6.7. Each image is a point in a
high-dimensional space whose dimensionality is determined by the number of pix-
els. Because the objects can occur at different vertical and horizontal positions within
the image and in different orientations, there are three degrees of freedom of vari-
ability between images, and a set of images will, to a ﬁrst approximation, live on
a three-dimensional manifold embedded within the high-dimensional space. Due to
the complex relationships between the object position or orientation and the pixel
intensities, this manifold will be highly nonlinear.
In fact, the number of pixels is really an artefact of the image generation pro-
cess since they represent measurements of a continuous world. Capturing the same
image at a higher resolution increases the dimensionality Dof the data space with-
out changing the fact that the images still live on a three-dimensional manifold. If
we can associate localized basis functions with the data manifold, rather than with
the entire high-dimensional data space, we might expect that the number of required
basis functions would grow exponentially with the dimensionality of the manifold
rather than with the dimensionality of the data space. Since the manifold will typi-
cally have a much lower dimensionality than the data space, this represents a huge
Figure 6.7 Examples of images of a hand-
written digit that differ in the
location of the digit within
the images as well as in
their orientation. This data
lives on a nonlinear three-
dimensional manifold within the
high-dimensional image space.

=== PDF PAGE 196 (Book Page 178) ===
178 6. DEEP NEURAL NETWORKS
Figure 6.8 The top row shows examples of natural images of size 64×64pixels, whereas the bottom
row shows randomly generated images of the same size obtained by drawing pixel values
from a uniform probability distribution over the possible pixel colours.
improvement. Effectively, neural networks learn a set of basis functions that are
adapted to data manifolds. Moreover, for a particular application, not all directions
within the manifold may be signiﬁcant. For example, if we wish to determine only
the orientation, and not the position, of the object in Figure 6.7, then there is only one
relevant degree of freedom on the manifold and not three. Neural networks are also
able to learn which directions on the manifold are relevant to predicting the desired
outputs.
Another way to see that real data is conﬁned to low-dimensional manifolds is
to consider the task of generating random images. In Figure 6.8 we see examples
of natural images along with examples of synthetic images of the same resolution
generated by sampling each of the red, green, and blue intensities at each pixel inde-
pendently at random from a uniform distribution. We see that none of the synthetic
images look at all like natural images. The reason is that these random images lack
the very strong correlations between pixels that natural images exhibit. For example,
two adjacent pixels in a natural image have a much higher probability of having the
same, or very similar, colour, than would two adjacent images in the random exam-
ples. Each of the images in Figure 6.8 corresponds to a point in a high-dimensional
space, yet natural images cover only a tiny fraction of this space.
6.1.4 Data-dependent basis functions
We have seen that simple basis functions that are chosen independently of the
problem being solved can run into signiﬁcant limitations, particularly in spaces of
high dimensionality. If we want to use basis functions in such situations, then one
approach would be to use expert knowledge to hand-craft the basis functions in a
=== PDF PAGE 197 (Book Page 179) ===
6.1. Limitations of Fixed Basis Functions 179
way that is speciﬁc to each application. For many years, this was the mainstream
approach in machine learning. Basis functions, often called features, would be de-
termined by a combination of domain knowledge and trial-and-error. However, this
approach met with limited success and was superseded by data-driven approaches
in which basis functions are learned from the training data. Domain knowledge still
plays a role in modern machine learning, but at a more qualitative level in designing
network architectures where it can capture appropriate inductive bias, as we will see Section 9.1
in later chapters.
Since data in a high-dimensional space may be conﬁned to a low-dimensional
manifold, we do not need basis functions that densely ﬁll the whole input space,
but instead we can use basis functions that are themselves associated with the data
manifold. One way to do this is to have one basis function associated with each data
point in the training set, which ensures that the basis functions are automatically
adapted to the underlying data manifold. An example of such a model is that of
radial basis functions (Broomhead and Lowe, 1988), which have the property that
each basis function depends only on the radial distance (typically Euclidean) from a
central vector. If the basis centres are chosen to be the input data values {xn}then
there is one basis function n(x)for each data point, which will therefore capture
the whole of the data manifold. A typical choice for a radial basis function is
n(x) = exp/parenleftBigg
−/bardblx−xn/bardbl2
s2/parenrightBigg
(6.6)
wheresis a parameter controlling the width of the basis function. Although it can be
quick to set up such a model, a major problem with this technique is that it becomes
computationally unwieldy for large data sets. Moreover, the model needs careful
regularization to avoid severe over-ﬁtting.
A related approach, called a support vector machine or SVM (Vapnik, 1995;
Sch¨olkopf and Smola, 2002; Bishop, 2006), addresses this by again deﬁning basis
functions that are centred on each of the training data points and then selecting a
subset of these automatically during training. As a result, the effective number of
basis functions in the resulting models is generally much smaller than the number of
training points, although it is often still relatively large and typically increases with
the size of the training set. Support vector machines also do not produce probabilistic
outputs, and they do not naturally generalize to more than two classes. Methods such
as radial basis functions and support vector machines have been superseded by deep
neural networks, which are much better at exploiting very large data sets efﬁciently.
Moreover, as we will see later, neural networks are able to learn deep hierarchical
representations, which are crucial to achieving high prediction accuracy in more
complex applications.
=== PDF PAGE 198 (Book Page 180) ===
180 6. DEEP NEURAL NETWORKS
6.2. Multilayer Networks
In the previous section, we saw that to apply linear models of the form (6.1) to prob-
lems involving large-scale data sets and high-dimensional spaces, we need to ﬁnd a
set of basis functions that is tuned to the problem being solved. The key idea behind
neural networks is to choose basis functions j(x)that themselves have learnable
parameters and then allow these parameters to be adjusted, along with the coefﬁ-
cients{wj}, during training. We then optimize the whole model by minimizing an
error function using gradient-based optimization methods, such as stochastic gradi-
ent descent, where the error function is deﬁned jointly across all the parameters in Chapter 7
the model.
There are, of course, many ways to construct parametric nonlinear basis func-
tions. One key requirement is that they must be differentiable functions of their
learnable parameters so that we can apply gradient-based optimization. The most
successful choice has been to use basis functions that follow the same form as (6.1),
so that each basis function is itself a nonlinear function of a linear combination of
the inputs, where the coefﬁcients in the linear combination are learnable parameters.
Note that this construction can clearly be extended recursively to give a hierarchical
model with many layers, which forms the basis for deep neural networks. Section 6.3
Consider a basic neural network model having two layers of learnable parame-
ters. First, we construct Mlinear combinations of the input variables x1;:::;xDin
the form
a(1)
j=D/summationdisplay
i=1w(1)
jixi+w(1)
j0 (6.7)
wherej= 1;:::;M , and the superscript (1)indicates that the corresponding pa-
rameters are in the ﬁrst ‘layer’ of the network. We will refer to the parameters w(1)
ji
asweights and the parameters w(1)
j0asbiases, while the quantities a(1)
jare called Chapter 4
pre-activations. Each of the quantities ajis then transformed using a differentiable,
nonlinear activation function h(·) to give
z(1)
j=h(a(1)
j); (6.8)
which represent the outputs of the basis functions in (6.1). In the context of neu-
ral networks, these basis functions are called hidden units. We will explore various
choices for the nonlinear function h(·) shortly, but here we note that provided the
derivativeh/prime(·)can be evaluated, then the overall network function will be differen-
tiable. Following (6.1), these values are again linearly combined to give
a(2)
k=M/summationdisplay
j=1w(2)
kjz(1)
j+w(2)
k0(6.9)
wherek= 1;:::;K , andKis the total number of outputs. This transformation
corresponds to the second layer of the network, and again the w(2)
k0are bias parame-
ters. Finally, the{a(2)
k}are transformed using an appropriate output-unit activation