
=== PDF PAGE 198 (Book Page 180) ===
180 6. DEEP NEURAL NETWORKS
6.2. Multilayer Networks
In the previous section, we saw that to apply linear models of the form (6.1) to prob-
lems involving large-scale data sets and high-dimensional spaces, we need to ﬁnd a
set of basis functions that is tuned to the problem being solved. The key idea behind
neural networks is to choose basis functions j(x)that themselves have learnable
parameters and then allow these parameters to be adjusted, along with the coefﬁ-
cients{wj}, during training. We then optimize the whole model by minimizing an
error function using gradient-based optimization methods, such as stochastic gradi-
ent descent, where the error function is deﬁned jointly across all the parameters in Chapter 7
the model.
There are, of course, many ways to construct parametric nonlinear basis func-
tions. One key requirement is that they must be differentiable functions of their
learnable parameters so that we can apply gradient-based optimization. The most
successful choice has been to use basis functions that follow the same form as (6.1),
so that each basis function is itself a nonlinear function of a linear combination of
the inputs, where the coefﬁcients in the linear combination are learnable parameters.
Note that this construction can clearly be extended recursively to give a hierarchical
model with many layers, which forms the basis for deep neural networks. Section 6.3
Consider a basic neural network model having two layers of learnable parame-
ters. First, we construct Mlinear combinations of the input variables x1;:::;xDin
the form
a(1)
j=D/summationdisplay
i=1w(1)
jixi+w(1)
j0 (6.7)
wherej= 1;:::;M , and the superscript (1)indicates that the corresponding pa-
rameters are in the ﬁrst ‘layer’ of the network. We will refer to the parameters w(1)
ji
asweights and the parameters w(1)
j0asbiases, while the quantities a(1)
jare called Chapter 4
pre-activations. Each of the quantities ajis then transformed using a differentiable,
nonlinear activation function h(·) to give
z(1)
j=h(a(1)
j); (6.8)
which represent the outputs of the basis functions in (6.1). In the context of neu-
ral networks, these basis functions are called hidden units. We will explore various
choices for the nonlinear function h(·) shortly, but here we note that provided the
derivativeh/prime(·)can be evaluated, then the overall network function will be differen-
tiable. Following (6.1), these values are again linearly combined to give
a(2)
k=M/summationdisplay
j=1w(2)
kjz(1)
j+w(2)
k0(6.9)
wherek= 1;:::;K , andKis the total number of outputs. This transformation
corresponds to the second layer of the network, and again the w(2)
k0are bias parame-
ters. Finally, the{a(2)
k}are transformed using an appropriate output-unit activation
=== PDF PAGE 199 (Book Page 181) ===
6.2.
Multilayer Networks 181
Figure 6.9 Network diagram for a two-layer
neural network. The input, hid-
den, and output variables are
represented by nodes, and the
weight parameters are repre-
sented by links between the
nodes. The bias parame-
ters are denoted by links com-
ing from additional input and
hidden variables x0andz0
which are themselves denoted
by solid nodes. Arrows denote
the direction of information ﬂow
through the network during for-
ward propagation.xDInputs
...
x1
x0zMHidden
units...
z1
z0yKOutputs
...
y1w(1)
M
D
w(1)
10w(2)
K
M
w(2)
10
functionf(
·)to give a set of network outputs yk. A two-layer neural network can be
represented in diagram form as shown in Figure 6.9.
6.2.1 Parameter matrices
As we discussed in the context of linear regression models, the bias parameters Section 4.1.1
in (6.7) can be absorbed into the set of weight parameters by deﬁning an additional
input variable x0whose value is clamped at x0= 1, so that (6.7) takes the form
aj=D/summationdisplay
i=0w(1)
jixi: (6.10)
We can similarly absorb the second-layer biases into the second-layer weights, so
that the overall network function becomes
yk(x;w) =f
M/summationdisplay
j=0w(2)
kjh/parenleftBiggD/summationdisplay
i=0w(1)
jixi/parenrightBigg
: (6.11)
Another notation that will prove convenient at various points in the book is to repre-
sent the inputs as a column vector x= (x1;:::;xN)Tand then to gather the weight
and bias parameters in (6.11) into matrices to give
y(x;w) =f/parenleftbig
W(2)h/parenleftbig
W(1)x/parenrightbig/parenrightbig
(6.12)
wheref(·)andh(·) are evaluated on each vector element separately.
6.2.2 Universal approximation
The capability of a two-layer network to model a broad range of functions is
illustrated in Figure 6.10. This ﬁgure also shows how individual hidden units work
collaboratively to approximate the ﬁnal function. The role of hidden units in a simple
classiﬁcation problem is illustrated in Figure 6.11.
=== PDF PAGE 200 (Book Page 182) ===
182 6. DEEP NEURAL NETWORKS
Figure 6.10 Illustration of the ca-
pability of a two-layer neural network
to approximate four different func-
tions: (a)f(x) =x2, (b)f(x) =
sin(x), (c), f(x) =|x|, and (d)
f(x) =H(x)whereH(x)is the
Heaviside step function. In each
case,N= 50 data points, shown as
blue dots, have been sampled uni-
formly inxover the interval (−1; 1)
and the corresponding values of
f(x)evaluated. These data points
are then used to train a two-layer
network having three hidden units
with tanh activation functions and
linear output units. The resulting
network functions are shown by the
red curves, and the outputs of the
three hidden units are shown by the
three dashed curves.
(a)
 (b)
(c)
 (d)
The approximation properties of two-layer feed-forward networks were widely
studied in the 1980s, with various theorems showing that, for a wide range of activa-
tion functions, such networks can approximate any function deﬁned over a continu-
ous subset of RDto arbitrary accuracy (Funahashi, 1989; Cybenko, 1989; Hornik,
Stinchcombe, and White, 1989; Leshno et al., 1993). A similar result holds for func-
tions from any ﬁnite-dimensional discrete space to any another. Neural networks are
therefore said to be universal approximators.
Although such theorems are reassuring, they tell us only that there exists a net-
work that can represent the required function. In some cases, they may require net-
works that have an exponentially large number of hidden units. Moreover, they say
nothing about whether such a network can be found by a learning algorithm. Fur-
thermore, we will see later that the no free lunch theorem says that we can never ﬁnd Section 9.1.2
a truly universal machine learning algorithm. Finally, although networks having two
layers of weights are universal approximators, in a practical application, there can
be huge beneﬁts in considering networks having many more than two layers that can
learn hierarchical internal representations. All these points support the drive towards
deep learning.
6.2.3 Hidden unit activation functions
We have seen that the activation functions for the output units are determined
by the kind of distribution being modelled. For the hidden units, however, the only
requirement is that they need to be differentiable, which leaves a wide range of pos-
=== PDF PAGE 201 (Book Page 183) ===
6.2.
Multilayer Networks 183
Figure 6.11 Example of the solution of a sim-
ple two-class classiﬁcation prob-
lem involving synthetic data us-
ing a neural network having two
inputs, two hidden units with tanh
activation functions, and a single
output having a logistic-sigmoid
activation function. The dashed
blue lines show the z= 0:5 con-
tours for each of the hidden units,
and the red line shows the y=
0:5decision surface for the net-
work. For comparison, the green
lines denote the optimal decision
boundary computed from the dis-
tributions used to generate the
data.
−2 −1 0 1 2−2−10123
sibilities.
In most cases, all the hidden units in a network will be given the same
activation function, although in principle there is no reason why different choices
could not be applied in different parts of the network.
The simplest option for a hidden unit activation function is the identity function,
which means that all the hidden units become linear. However, for any such network,
we can always ﬁnd an equivalent network without hidden units. This follows from
the fact that the composition of successive linear transformations is itself a linear
transformation, and so its representational capability is no greater than that of a sin-
gle linear layer. However, if the number of hidden units is smaller than either the
number of input or output units, then the transformations that such a network can
generate are not the most general possible linear transformation from inputs to out-
puts because information is lost in the dimensionality reduction at the hidden units.
Consider a network with Ninputs,Mhidden units, and Koutputs, and where all ac-
tivation functions are linear. Such a network has M(N+K)parameters, whereas a
linear transformation of inputs directly to outputs would have NK parameters. If M
is small relative to NorK, or both, this leads to a two-layer linear network having
fewer parameters than the direct linear mapping, corresponding to a rank-deﬁcient
transformation. Such ‘bottleneck’ networks of linear units corresponds to a standard
data analysis technique called principal component analysis. In general, however, Chapter 16
there is limited interest in using multilayer networks of linear units since the overall
function computed by such a network is still linear.
A simple, nonlinear differentiable function is the logistic sigmoid given by
(a) =1
1
+ exp(−a); (6.13)
which is plotted in Figure 5.12. This was widely used in the early years of work on
multilayer neural networks and was partly inspired by studies of the properties of
=== PDF PAGE 202 (Book Page 184) ===
184 6.
DEEP NEURAL NETWORKS
−2.5 0.0 2.5−2.50.02.5
tanh
(a)
−2.5 0.0 2.5−2.50.02.5
hard tanh (b)
−2.5 0.0 2.5−2.50.02.5
softplus (c)
−2.5 0.0 2.5−2.50.02.5
ReLU
(d)
−2.5 0.0 2.5−2.50.02.5
leaky ReLU (e)
−2.5 0.0 2.5−2.50.02.5
absolute (f)
Figure
6.12 A variety of nonlinear activation functions.
biological neurons. A closely related function is tanh, which is deﬁned by
tanh(a) =ea−e−a
ea+e−
a; (6.14)
which is plotted in Figure 6.12(a). This function differs from the logistic sigmoid
by a linear transformation of its input and its output values, and so for any network
with logistic-sigmoid hidden-unit activation functions, there is an equivalent network
with tanh activation functions. However, when training a network, these are not Exercise 6.4
necessarily equivalent because for gradient-based optimization, the network weights
and biases need to be initialized, and so if the activation functions are changed, then
the initialization scheme must be adjusted accordingly. A ‘hard’ version of the tanh
function (Collobert, 2004) is given by
h(a) = max (−1; min(1;a )) (6.15)
and is plotted in Figure 6.12(b).
A major drawback of both the logistic sigmoid and the tanh activation functions
is that the gradients go to zero exponentially when the inputs have either large pos-
itive or large negative values. We will discuss this ‘vanishing gradients’ issue later, Section 7.4.2
=== PDF PAGE 203 (Book Page 185) ===
6.2.
Multilayer Networks 185
but for the moment, we note that it will generally be better to use activation func-
tions with non-zero gradients, at least when the input takes a large positive value.
One such choice is the softplus activation function given by Exercise 6.7
h(a) = ln (1 + exp(a)) ; (6.16)
which is plotted in Figure 6.12(c). For a/greatermuch1, we haveh(a)/similarequala, and so the gradient
remains non-zero even when the input to the activation function is large and positive,
thereby helping to alleviate the vanishing gradients problem.
An even simpler choice of activation function is the rectiﬁed linear unit orReLU,
which is deﬁned by
h(a) = max(0 ;a) (6.17)
and which is plotted in Figure 6.12(d). Empirically, this is one of the best-performing
activation functions, and it is in widespread use. Note that strictly speaking, the
derivative of the ReLU function is not deﬁned when a= 0, but in practice this can
be safely ignored. The softplus function (6.16) can be viewed as a smoothed version
of the ReLU and is therefore also sometimes called soft ReLU. Exercise 6.5
Although the ReLU has a non-zero gradient for positive input values, this is
not the case for negative inputs, which can mean that some hidden units receive no
‘error signal’ during training. A modiﬁcation of ReLU that seeks to avoid this issue
is called a leaky ReLU and is deﬁned by
h(a) = max(0 ;a) +min(0;a ); (6.18)
where 0<< 1. This function is plotted in Figure 6.12(e). Unlike ReLU, this has a
nonzero gradient for input values a<0, which ensures that there is a signal to drive
training. A variant of this activation function uses =−1, in which case h(a) =|a|,
which is plotted in Figure 6.12(f). Another variant allows each hidden unit to have its
own valuej, which can be learned during network training by evaluating gradients
with respect to the {j}along with the gradients with respect to the weights and
biases.
The introduction of ReLU gave a big improvement in training efﬁciency over
previous sigmoidal activation functions (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton, 2012).
As well as allowing deeper networks to be trained efﬁciently, it is much less sensitive
to the random initialization of the weights. It is also well suited to a low-precision
implementation, such as 8-bit ﬁxed versus 64-bit ﬂoating point, and it is computa-
tionally cheap to evaluate. Many practical applications simply use ReLU units as
the default unless the goal is explicitly to explore the effects of different choices of
activation function.
6.2.4 Weight-space symmetries
One property of feed-forward networks is that multiple distinct choices for the
weight vector wcan all give rise to the same mapping function from inputs to outputs
(Chen, Lu, and Hecht-Nielsen, 1993). Consider a two-layer network of the form
shown in Figure 6.9 withMhidden units having tanh activation functions and full
connectivity in both layers. If we change the sign of all the weights and the bias
=== PDF PAGE 204 (Book Page 186) ===
186 6.
DEEP NEURAL NETWORKS
feeding into a particular hidden unit, then, for a given input data point, the sign
of the pre-activation of the hidden unit will be reversed, and therefore so too will
the activation, because tanh is an odd function, so that tanh(−a) =−tanh(a).
This transformation can be exactly compensated for by changing the sign of all the
weights leading out of that hidden unit. Thus, by changing the signs of a particular
group of weights (and a bias), the input–output mapping function represented by
the network is unchanged, and so we have found two different weight vectors that
give rise to the same mapping function. For Mhidden units, there will be Msuch
‘sign-ﬂip’ symmetries, and thus, any given weight vector will be one of a set 2M
equivalent weight vectors .
Similarly, imagine that we interchange the values of all of the weights (and the
bias) leading both into and out of a particular hidden unit with the corresponding
values of the weights (and bias) associated with a different hidden unit. Again, this
clearly leaves the network input–output mapping function unchanged, but it cor-
responds to a different choice of weight vector. For Mhidden units, any given
weight vector will belong to a set of M×(M−1)×···× 2×1 =M!equivalent
weight vectors associated with this interchange symmetry, corresponding to the M!
different orderings of the hidden units. The network will therefore have an overall
weight-space symmetry factor of M! 2M. For networks with more than two layers
of weights, the total level of symmetry will be given by the product of such factors,
one for each layer of hidden units.
It turns out that these factors account for all the symmetries in weight space
(except for possible accidental symmetries due to speciﬁc choices for the weight
values). Furthermore, the existence of these symmetries is not a particular property
of the tanh function but applies to a wide range of activation functions (Kurkov ´a and
Kainen, 1994). In general, these symmetries in weight space are of little practical
consequence, since network training aims to ﬁnd a speciﬁc setting for the parameters,
and the existence of other, equivalent, settings is of little consequence. However,
weight-space symmetries do play a role when Bayesian methods are used to evaluate
the probability distribution over networks of different sizes (Bishop, 2006).
6.3. Deep
Networks
W
e have motivated the development of neural networks by making the basis func-
tions of a linear regression or classiﬁcation model themselves be governed by learn-
able parameters, giving rise to the two-layer network model shown in Figure 6.9. For
many years, this was the most widely used architecture, primarily because it proved
difﬁcult to train networks with more than two layers effectively. However, extend-
ing neural networks to have more than two layers, known as deep neural networks,
brings many advantages as we will discuss shortly, and recent advances in techniques
for training neural networks are effective for networks with many layers. Chapter 7
We can easily extend the two-layer network architecture (6.12) to any ﬁnite num-
berLof layers, in which layer l= 1;:::;L computes the following function:
z(l)=h(l)/parenleftbig
W(l)z(l−1)/parenrightbig
(6.19)
=== PDF PAGE 205 (Book Page 187) ===
6.3.
Deep Networks 187
whereh(l)denotes the activation function associated with layer l, andW(l)denotes
the corresponding matrix of weight and bias parameters. Also, z(0)=xrepresents
the input vector and z(L)=yrepresents the output vector.
Note that there has been some confusion in the literature regarding the termi-
nology for counting the number of layers in such networks. Thus, the network in
Figure 6.9 is sometimes described as a three-layer network (which counts the num-
ber of layers of units and treats the inputs as units) or sometimes as a single-hidden-
layer network (which counts the number of layers of hidden units). We recommend
a terminology in which Figure 6.9 is called a two-layer network, because it is the
number of layers of learnable weights that is important for determining the network
properties.
We have seen that a network of the form shown in Figure 6.9, having two layers
of learnable parameters, has universal approximation capabilities. However, net-
works with more than two layers can sometimes represent a given function with far
fewer parameters than a two-layer network. Mont ´ufar et al. (2014) show that the
network function divides the input space into a number of regions that is exponential
in the depth of the network, but which is only polynomial in the width of the hidden
layers. To represent the same function using a two-layer network would require an
exponential number of hidden units.
6.3.1 Hierarchical representations
Although this is an interesting result, a more compelling reason to explore deep
neural networks is that the network architecture encodes a particular form of induc-
tive bias, namely that the outputs are related to the input space through a hierarchical
representation. A good example is the task of recognizing objects in images. The Chapter 10
relationship between the pixels of an image and a high-level concept such as ‘cat’ is
highly complex and nonlinear, and would be an extremely challenging problem for
a two-layer network. However, a deep neural network can learn to detect low-level
features, such as edges, in the early layers, and can then combine these in subse-
quent layers to make higher-level features such as eyes or whiskers, which in turn
can be combined in later layers to detect the presence of a cat. This can be viewed
as a compositional inductive bias, in which higher-level objects, such as a cat, are
composed of lower-level objects, such as eyes, which in turn have yet lower-level el-
ements such as edges. We can also think of this in reverse by considering the process
of generating an image starting with low-level features such as edges, then combin-
ing these to form simple shapes such as circles, and then combining those in turn to
form higher-level objects such as cats. At each stage there are many ways to com-
bine different components, giving an exponential gain in the number of possibilities
with increasing depth.
6.3.2 Distributed representations
Neural networks can take advantage of another form of compositionality called
adistributed representation. Conceptually, each unit in a hidden layer can be thought
of as representing a ‘feature’ at that level of the network, with a high value of the