
=== PDF PAGE 212 (Book Page 194) ===
194

6. DEEP NEURAL NETWORKS

Figure 6.15 Example of a neural network
having a general feed-forward topology. Note
that each hidden and output unit has an associated bias parameter (omitted for clarity).

outputs

inputs
x1

z2

y1

z3

y2

z1
x2

6.3.7 Tensors
We see that linear algebra plays a central role in neural networks, with quantities
such as data sets, activations, and network parameters represented as scalars, vectors,
and matrices. However, we also encounter variables of higher dimensionality. Consider, for example, a data set of N colour images each of which is I pixels high and
J pixels wide. Each pixel is indexed by its row and column within the image and
has red, green, and blue values. We have one such value for each image in the data
set, and so we can represent a particular intensity value by a four-dimensional array
X with elements xijkn where i ∈ {1, . . . , I} and j ∈ {1, . . . , J } index the row
and column within the image, k ∈ {1, 2, 3} indexes the red, green, and blue intensities, and n ∈ {1, . . . , N } indexes the particular image within the data set. These
higher-dimensional arrays are called tensors and include scalars, vectors, and matrices as special cases. We will see many examples of such tensors when we discuss
more sophisticated neural network architectures later in the book. Massively parallel
processors such as GPUs are especially well suited to processing tensors.

6.4. Error Functions
Chapter 4
Chapter 5

In earlier chapters, we explored linear models for regression and classification, and
in the process we derived suitable forms for the error functions along with corresponding choices for the output-unit activation function. The same considerations
for choosing an error function apply for multilayer neural networks, and so for convenience, we will summarize the key points here.

6.4.1 Regression

Section 2.3.4

We start by discussing regression problems, and for the moment we consider
a single target variable t that can take any real value. Following the discussion of
regression in single-layer networks, we assume that t has a Gaussian distribution
with an x-dependent mean, which is given by the output of the neural network, so
that

p(t|x, w) = N t|y(x, w), σ 2
(6.23)


=== PDF PAGE 213 (Book Page 195) ===
6.4. Error Functions

Section 6.5

195

where σ 2 is the variance of the Gaussian noise. Of course this is a somewhat restrictive assumption, and in some applications we will need to extend this approach to
allow for more general distributions. For the conditional distribution given by (6.23),
it is sufficient to take the output-unit activation function to be the identity, because
such a network can approximate any continuous function from x to y. Given a data
set of N i.i.d. observations X = {x1 , . . . , xN }, along with corresponding target
values t = {t1 , . . . , tN }, we can construct the corresponding likelihood function:
p(t|X, w, σ 2 ) =

N
Y
n=1

p(tn |y(xn , w), σ 2 ).

(6.24)

Note that in the machine learning literature, it is usual to consider the minimization
of an error function rather than the maximization of the likelihood, and so here we
will follow this convention. Taking the negative logarithm of the likelihood function
(6.24), we obtain the error function
N
1 X
N
N
{y(xn , w) − tn }2 +
ln σ 2 +
ln(2π),
2
2σ n=1
2
2

(6.25)

which can be used to learn the parameters w and σ 2 . Consider first the determination
of w. Maximizing the likelihood function is equivalent to minimizing the sum-ofsquares error function given by
N

E(w) =

Chapter 9

Exercise 6.8

1X
{y(xn , w) − tn }2
2 n=1

(6.26)

where we have discarded additive and multiplicative constants. The value of w
found by minimizing E(w) will be denoted w? . Note that this will typically not
correspond to the global maximum of the likelihood function because the nonlinearity of the network function y(xn , w) causes the error E(w) to be non-convex,
and so finding the global optimum is generally infeasible. Moreover, regularization
terms may be added to the error function and other modifications may be made to
the training process, so that the resulting solution for the network parameters may
differ significantly from the maximum likelihood solution.
Having found w? , the value of σ 2 can be found by minimizing the error function
(6.25) to give
N
1 X
σ 2? =
{y(xn , w? ) − tn }2 .
(6.27)
N n=1
Note that this can be evaluated once the iterative optimization required to find w? is
completed.
If we have multiple target variables, and we assume that they are independent,
conditional on x and w, with shared noise variance σ 2 , then the conditional distribution of the target values is given by

p(t|x, w) = N t|y(x, w), σ 2 I .
(6.28)


=== PDF PAGE 214 (Book Page 196) ===
196

6. DEEP NEURAL NETWORKS

Exercise 6.9

Following the same argument as for a single target variable, we see that maximizing
the likelihood function with respect to the weights is equivalent to minimizing the
sum-of-squares error function:
N

E(w) =

1X
ky(xn , w) − tn k2 .
2 n=1

(6.29)

The noise variance is then given by
N

σ 2? =

Exercise 6.10
Section 5.4.6

1 X
ky(xn , w? ) − tn k2
N K n=1

(6.30)

where K is the dimensionality of the target variable. The assumption of conditional
independence of the target variables can be dropped at the expense of a slightly more
complex optimization problem.
Recall that there is a natural pairing of the error function (given by the negative
log likelihood) and the output-unit activation function. In regression, we can view the
network as having an output activation function that is the identity, so that yk = ak .
The corresponding sum-of-squares error function then has the property
∂E
= y k − tk .
∂ak

6.4.2

Section 5.4.6

(6.31)

Binary classification

Now consider binary classification in which we have a single target variable
t such that t = 1 denotes class C1 and t = 0 denotes class C2 . Following the
discussion of canonical link functions, we consider a network having a single output
whose activation function is a logistic sigmoid (6.13) so that 0 ⩽ y(x, w) ⩽ 1. We
can interpret y(x, w) as the conditional probability p(C1 |x), with p(C2 |x) given by
1 − y(x, w). The conditional distribution of targets given inputs is then a Bernoulli
distribution of the form
p(t|x, w) = y(x, w)t {1 − y(x, w)}

1−t

.

(6.32)

If we consider a training set of independent observations, then the error function,
which is given by the negative log likelihood, is then a cross-entropy error of the
form
N
X
E(w) = −
{tn ln yn + (1 − tn ) ln(1 − yn )}
(6.33)
n=1

Exercise 6.11

where yn denotes y(xn , w). Simard, Steinkraus, and Platt (2003) found that using
the cross-entropy error function instead of the sum-of-squares for a classification
problem leads to faster training as well as improved generalization.
Note that there is no analogue of the noise variance σ 2 in (6.32) because the
target values are assumed to be correctly labelled. However, the model is easily
extended to allow for labelling errors by introducing a probability  that the target


=== PDF PAGE 215 (Book Page 197) ===
6.4. Error Functions

197

value t has been flipped to the wrong value (Opper and Winther, 2000). Here  may
be set in advance, or it may be treated as a hyperparameter whose value is inferred
from the data.
If we have K separate binary classifications to perform, then we can use a network having K outputs each of which has a logistic-sigmoid activation function.
Associated with each output is a binary class label tk ∈ {0, 1}, where k = 1, . . . , K.
If we assume that the class labels are independent, given the input vector, then the
conditional distribution of the targets is
p(t|x, w) =

K
Y
k=1

Exercise 6.13

N X
K
X
n=1 k=1

{tnk ln ynk + (1 − tnk ) ln(1 − ynk )}

(6.34)

(6.35)

multiclass classification

Finally, we consider the standard multiclass classification problem in which each
input is assigned to one of K mutually exclusive classes. The binary target variables
tk ∈ {0, 1} have a 1-of-K coding scheme indicating the class, and the network
outputs are interpreted as yk (x, w) = p(tk = 1|x), leading to the error function
(5.80), which we reproduce here:
E(w) = −

Section 5.4.4

.

where ynk denotes yk (xn , w). Again, the derivative of the error function with respect to the pre-activation for a particular output unit takes the form (6.31), just as in
the regression case.

6.4.3

Section 5.1.3

1−tk

Taking the negative logarithm of the corresponding likelihood function then gives
the following error function:
E(w) = −

Exercise 6.14

yk (x, w)tk [1 − yk (x, w)]

N X
K
X

tkn ln yk (xn , w).

(6.36)

n=1 k=1

The output-unit activation function, which corresponds to the canonical link, is given
by the softmax function:
exp(ak (x, w))
yk (x, w) = X
,
exp(aj (x, w))

(6.37)

j

P

Chapter 9
Exercise 6.15

which satisfies 0 ⩽ yk ⩽ 1 and k yk = 1. Note that the yk (x, w) are unchanged
if a constant is added to all of the ak (x, w), causing the error function to be constant
for some directions in weight space. This degeneracy is removed if an appropriate
regularization term is added to the error function. Once again, the derivative of the
error function with respect to the pre-activation for a particular output unit takes the
familiar form (6.31).


=== PDF PAGE 216 (Book Page 198) ===
198

6. DEEP NEURAL NETWORKS
In summary, there is a natural choice of both output-unit activation function
and matching error function according to the type of problem being solved. For
regression, we use linear outputs and a sum-of-squares error, for multiple independent binary classifications, we use logistic sigmoid outputs and a cross-entropy error
function, and for multi-class classification, we use softmax outputs with the corresponding multi-class cross-entropy error function. For classification problems involving two classes, we can use a single logistic sigmoid output, or alternatively, we
can use a network with two outputs having a softmax output activation function.
This procedure is quite general, and by considering other forms of conditional
distribution, we can derive the associated error functions as the corresponding negative log likelihood. We will see an example of this in the next section when we
consider multimodal network outputs.

6.5. Mixture Density Networks
So far in this chapter we have discussed neural networks whose outputs represent
simple probability distributions comprising either a Gaussian for continuous variables or a binary distribution for discrete variables. We close the chapter by showing
how a neural network can represent more general conditional probabilities by treating the outputs of the network as the parameters of a more complex distribution, in
this case a Gaussian mixture model. This is known as a mixture density network,
and we will see how to define the associated error function and the corresponding
output-unit activation functions.

6.5.1

Exercise 6.16

Robot kinematics example

The goal of supervised learning is to model a conditional distribution p(t|x),
which for many simple regression problems is chosen to be Gaussian. However,
practical machine learning problems can often have significantly non-Gaussian distributions. These can arise, for example, with inverse problems in which the distribution can be multimodal, in which case the Gaussian assumption can lead to very
poor predictions.
As a simple illustration of an inverse problem, consider the kinematics of a robot
arm, as illustrated in Figure 6.16. The forward problem involves finding the end effector position given the joint angles and has a unique solution. However, in practice
we wish to move the end effector of the robot to a specific position, and to do this we
must set appropriate joint angles. We therefore need to solve the inverse problem,
which has two solutions, as seen in Figure 6.16.
Forward problems often correspond to causality in a physical system and generally have a unique solution. For instance, a specific pattern of symptoms in the
human body may be caused by the presence of a particular disease. In machine
learning, however, we typically have to solve an inverse problem, such as trying to
predict the presence of a disease given a set of symptoms. If the forward problem
involves a many-to-one mapping, then the inverse problem will have multiple solutions. For instance, several different diseases may result in the same symptoms.


=== PDF PAGE 217 (Book Page 199) ===
6.5. Mixture Density Networks
Figure 6.16 (a) A two-link robot
arm, in which the Cartesian coordinates (x1 , x2 ) of the end effector
are determined uniquely by the two
joint angles θ1 and θ2 and the (fixed)
lengths L1 and L2 of the arms. This
is known as the forward kinematics
of the arm. (b) In practice, we have
to find the joint angles that will give
rise to a desired end effector position. This inverse kinematics has
two solutions corresponding to ‘elbow up’ and ‘elbow down’.

(x1 , x2 )

L2

199

(x1 , x2 )

θ2
elbow
up

L1

elbow
down

θ1
(a)

(b)

In the robotics example, the kinematics is defined by geometrical equations, and
the multimodality is readily apparent. However, in many machine learning problems
the presence of multimodality, particularly in problems involving spaces of high dimensionality, can be less obvious. For tutorial purposes, however, we will consider
a simple toy problem for which we can easily visualize the multimodality. The data
for this problem is generated by sampling a variable x uniformly over the interval
(0, 1), to give a set of values {xn }, and the corresponding target values tn are obtained by computing the function xn + 0.3 sin(2πxn ) and then adding uniform noise
over the interval (−0.1, 0.1). The inverse problem is then obtained by keeping the
same data points but exchanging the roles of x and t. Figure 6.17 shows the data sets
for the forward and inverse problems, along with the results of fitting two-layer neural networks having six hidden units and a single linear output unit by minimizing
a sum-of-squares error function. Least squares corresponds to maximum likelihood
under a Gaussian assumption. We see that this leads to a good model for the forward
problem but a very poor model for the highly non-Gaussian inverse problem.

6.5.2

Conditional mixture distributions

We therefore seek a general framework for modelling conditional probability
distributions. This can be achieved by using a mixture model for p(t|x) in which
Figure 6.17 On the left is the data
set for a simple forward problem in
which the red curve shows the result
of fitting a two-layer neural network
by minimizing the sum-of-squares
error function. The corresponding
inverse problem, shown on the right,
is obtained by exchanging the roles
of x and t. Here the same network,
again trained by minimizing the sumof-squares error function, gives a
poor fit to the data due to the multimodality of the data set.

1

1

0

0
0

1

0

1

