=== PAGE 225 (Book page ~208) ===
7
Gradient
Descent
In the previous chapter we saw that neural networks are a very broad and ﬂexible
class of functions and are able in principle to approximate any desired function to
arbitrarily high accuracy given a sufﬁciently large number of hidden units. More-
over, we saw that deep neural networks can encode inductive biases corresponding
to hierarchical representations, which prove valuable in a wide range of practical
applications. We now turn to the task of ﬁnding a suitable setting for the network
parameters (weights and biases), based on a set of training data.
As with the regression and classiﬁcation models discussed in earlier chapters,
we choose the model parameters by optimizing an error function. We have seen how
to deﬁne a suitable error function for a particular application by using maximum
likelihood. Although in principle the error function could be minimized numerically Section 6.4
through a series of direct error function evaluations, this turns out to be very inefﬁ-
cient. Instead, we turn to another core concept that is used in deep learning, which
209 © The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
C. M. Bishop, H. Bishop, Deep Learning , https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-45468-4_7    

=== PAGE 226 (Book page ~209) ===
210 7.
GRADIENT DESCENT
is that optimizing the error function can be done much more efﬁciently by making
use of gradient information, in other words by evaluating the derivatives of the error
function with respect to the network parameters. This is why we took care to en-
sure that the function represented by the neural network is differentiable by design.
Likewise, the error function itself also needs to be differentiable.
The required derivatives of the error function with respect to each of the pa-
rameters in the network can be evaluated efﬁciently using a technique called back-
propagation, which involves successive computations that ﬂow backwards through Chapter 8
the network in a way that is analogous to the forward ﬂow of function computations
during the evaluation of the network outputs.
Although the likelihood is used to deﬁne an error function, the goal when op-
timizing the error function in a neural network is to achieve good generalization on
test data. In classical statistics, maximum likelihood is used to ﬁt a parametric model
to a ﬁnite data set, in which the number of data points typically far exceeds the num-
ber of parameters in the model. The optimal solution has the maximum value of the
likelihood function, and the values found for the ﬁtted parameters are of direct inter-
est. By contrast, modern deep learning works with very rich models containing huge
numbers of learnable parameters, and the goal is never simply exact optimization. Section 9.3.2
Instead, the properties and behaviour of the learning algorithm itself, along with var-
ious methods for regularization, are important in determining how well the solution Chapter 9
generalizes to new data.
7.1. Err
or Surfaces
Our
goal during training is to ﬁnd values for the weights and biases in the neural
network that will allow it to make effective predictions. For convenience we will
group these parameters into a single vector w, and we will optimize wby using a
chosen error function E(w). At this point, it is useful to have a geometrical picture
of the error function, which we can view as a surface sitting over ‘weight space’, as
shown in Figure 7.1.
First note that if we make a small step in weight space from wtow+wthen
the change in the error function is given by
E/similarequalwT∇E(w) (7.1)
where the vector∇E(w)points in the direction of the greatest rate of increase of
the error function. Provided the error E(w)is a smooth, continuous function of w,
its smallest value will occur at a point in weight space such that the gradient of the
error function vanishes, so that
∇E(w) = 0 (7.2)
as otherwise we could make a small step in the direction of −∇E (w)and thereby
further reduce the error. Points at which the gradient vanishes are called stationary
points and may be further classiﬁed into minima, maxima, and saddle points. Section 7.1.1

=== PAGE 227 (Book page ~210) ===
7.1.
Error Surfaces 211
Figure 7.1 Geometrical view of the error function E(w)as a
surface sitting over weight space. Point wAis a
local minimum and wBis the global minimum, so
thatE(wA)>E(wB). At any point wC, the local
gradient of the error surface is given by the vector
∇E.
w1
w2E(w)
wAwBwC
rE
W
e will aim to ﬁnd a vector wsuch thatE(w)takes its smallest value. How-
ever, the error function typically has a highly nonlinear dependence on the weights
and bias parameters, and so there will be many points in weight space at which the
gradient vanishes (or is numerically very small). Indeed, for any point wthat is a
local minimum, there will generally be other points in weight space that are equiva-
lent minima. For instance, in a two-layer network of the kind shown in Figure 6.9,
withMhidden units, each point in weight space is a member of a family of M! 2M
equivalent points. Section 6.2.4
Furthermore, there may be multiple non-equivalent stationary points and in par-
ticular multiple non-equivalent minima. A minimum that corresponds to the smallest
value of the error function across the whole of w-space is said to be a global min-
imum. Any other minima corresponding to higher values of the error function are
said to be local minima. The error surfaces for deep neural networks can be very
complex, and it was thought that gradient-based methods might become trapped in
poor local minima. In practice, this seems not to be the case, and large networks can
reach solutions with similar performance under a variety of initial conditions. Section 9.3.2
7.1.1 Local quadratic approximation
Insight into the optimization problem and into the various techniques for solving
it can be obtained by considering a local quadratic approximation to the error func-
tion. The Taylor expansion of E(w)around some point /hatwidewin weight space is given
by
E(w)/similarequalE(/hatwidew) + (w−/hatwidew)Tb+1
2(
w−/hatwidew)TH(w−/hatwidew) (7.3)
where cubic and higher terms have been omitted. Here bis deﬁned to be the gradient
ofEevaluated at/hatwidew
b≡∇E|w=bw: (7.4)
TheHessian is deﬁned to be the corresponding matrix of second derivatives
H(/hatwidew) =∇∇E (w)|w=bw: (7.5)

=== PAGE 228 (Book page ~211) ===
212 7. GRADIENT DESCENT
If there is a total of Wweights and biases in the network, then wandbhave length
WandHhas dimensionality W×W. From (7.3), the corresponding local approx-
imation to the gradient is given by
∇E(w) =b+H(w−/hatwidew): (7.6)
For points wthat are sufﬁciently close to /hatwidew, these expressions will give reasonable
approximations for the error and its gradient.
Consider the particular case of a local quadratic approximation around a point
w?that is a minimum of the error function. In this case there is no linear term,
because∇E= 0atw?, and (7.3) becomes
E(w) =E(w?) +1
2(w−w?)TH(w−w?) (7.7)
where the Hessian His evaluated at w?. To interpret this geometrically, consider the
eigenvalue equation for the Hessian matrix:
Hui=iui (7.8)
where the eigenvectors uiform a complete orthonormal set so that Appendix A
uT
iuj=ij: (7.9)
We now expand (w−w?)as a linear combination of the eigenvectors in the form
w−w?=/summationdisplay
iiui: (7.10)
This can be regarded as a transformation of the coordinate system in which the origin
is translated to the point w?and the axes are rotated to align with the eigenvectors
through the orthogonal matrix whose columns are {u1;:::;uW}. By substituting Appendix A
(7.10) into (7.7) and using (7.8) and (7.9), the error function can be written in the
form Exercise 7.1
E(w) =E(w?) +1
2/summationdisplay
ii2
i: (7.11)
Suppose we set all i= 0 fori/negationslash=jand then vary j, corresponding to moving
waway from w?in the direction of uj. We see from (7.11) that the error function
will increase if the corresponding eigenvalue jis positive and will decrease if it is
negative. If all eigenvalues are positive then w?corresponds to a local minimum of
the error function, whereas if they are all negative then w?corresponds to a local
maximum. If we have a mix of positive and negative eigenvalues then w?represents
a saddle point.
A matrix His said to be positive deﬁnite if, and only if,
vTHv>0; for all v: (7.12)

=== PAGE 229 (Book page ~212) ===
7.2.
Gradient Descent Optimization 213
Figure 7.2 In the neighbourhood of a mini-
mum w?, the error function can
be approximated by a quadratic.
Contours of constant error are
then ellipses whose axes are
aligned with the eigenvectors
uiof the Hessian matrix, with
lengths that are inversely pro-
portional to the square roots of
the corresponding eigenvectors
i.
w1w2
−1=2
1−1=2
2u1
w?u2
Because
the eigenvectors{ui}form a complete set, an arbitrary vector vcan be
written in the form
v=/summationdisplay
iciui: (7.13)
From (7.8) and (7.9), we then have
vTHv=/summationdisplay
ic2
ii (7.14)
and so Hwill be positive deﬁnite if, and only if, all its eigenvalues are positive. Exercise 7.2
Thus, a necessary and sufﬁcient condition for w?to be a local minimum is that the
gradient of the error function should vanish at w?and the Hessian matrix evaluated
atw?should be positive deﬁnite. In the new coordinate system, whose basis vectors Exercise 7.3
are given by the eigenvectors {ui}, the contours of constant E(w)are axis-aligned
ellipses centred on the origin, as illustrated in Figure 7.2. Exercise 7.6
7.2. Gradient
Descent Optimization
There
is little hope of ﬁnding an analytical solution to the equation ∇E(w) = 0 for
an error function as complex as one deﬁned by a neural network, and so we resort to
iterative numerical procedures. The optimization of continuous nonlinear functions
is a widely studied problem, and there exists an extensive literature on how to solve it
efﬁciently. Most techniques involve choosing some initial value w(0)for the weight
vector and then moving through weight space in a succession of steps of the form
w()=w(−1)+ ∆w(−1)(7.15)
wherelabels the iteration step. Different algorithms involve different choices for
the weight vector update ∆w().
Because of the complex shape of the error surface for all but the simplest neu-
ral networks, the solution found will depend, among other things, on the particular
choice of initial parameter values w(0). To ﬁnd a sufﬁciently good solution, it may