=== PAGE 229 (Book page ~212) ===
7.2.
Gradient Descent Optimization 213
Figure 7.2 In the neighbourhood of a mini-
mum w?, the error function can
be approximated by a quadratic.
Contours of constant error are
then ellipses whose axes are
aligned with the eigenvectors
uiof the Hessian matrix, with
lengths that are inversely pro-
portional to the square roots of
the corresponding eigenvectors
i.
w1w2
−1=2
1−1=2
2u1
w?u2
Because
the eigenvectors{ui}form a complete set, an arbitrary vector vcan be
written in the form
v=/summationdisplay
iciui: (7.13)
From (7.8) and (7.9), we then have
vTHv=/summationdisplay
ic2
ii (7.14)
and so Hwill be positive deﬁnite if, and only if, all its eigenvalues are positive. Exercise 7.2
Thus, a necessary and sufﬁcient condition for w?to be a local minimum is that the
gradient of the error function should vanish at w?and the Hessian matrix evaluated
atw?should be positive deﬁnite. In the new coordinate system, whose basis vectors Exercise 7.3
are given by the eigenvectors {ui}, the contours of constant E(w)are axis-aligned
ellipses centred on the origin, as illustrated in Figure 7.2. Exercise 7.6
7.2. Gradient
Descent Optimization
There
is little hope of ﬁnding an analytical solution to the equation ∇E(w) = 0 for
an error function as complex as one deﬁned by a neural network, and so we resort to
iterative numerical procedures. The optimization of continuous nonlinear functions
is a widely studied problem, and there exists an extensive literature on how to solve it
efﬁciently. Most techniques involve choosing some initial value w(0)for the weight
vector and then moving through weight space in a succession of steps of the form
w()=w(−1)+ ∆w(−1)(7.15)
wherelabels the iteration step. Different algorithms involve different choices for
the weight vector update ∆w().
Because of the complex shape of the error surface for all but the simplest neu-
ral networks, the solution found will depend, among other things, on the particular
choice of initial parameter values w(0). To ﬁnd a sufﬁciently good solution, it may

=== PAGE 230 (Book page ~213) ===
214 7. GRADIENT DESCENT
be necessary to run a gradient-based algorithm multiple times, each time using a dif-
ferent randomly chosen starting point, and comparing the resulting performance on
an independent validation set.
7.2.1 Use of gradient information
The gradient of an error function for a deep neural network can be evaluated
efﬁciently using the technique of error backpropagation, and applying this gradient Chapter 8
information can lead to signiﬁcant improvements in the speed of network training.
We can see why this is so, as follows.
In the quadratic approximation to the error function given by (7.3), the error
surface is speciﬁed by the quantities bandH, which contain a total of W(W+
3)=2 independent elements (because the matrix His symmetric), where Wis the Exercise 7.7
dimensionality of w(i.e., the total number of learnable parameters in the network).
The location of the minimum of this quadratic approximation therefore depends on
O(W2)parameters, and we should not expect to be able to locate the minimum until
we have gathered O(W2)independent pieces of information. If we do not make
use of gradient information, we would expect to have to perform O(W2)function
evaluations, each of which would require O(W)steps. Thus, the computational
effort needed to ﬁnd the minimum using such an approach would be O(W3).
Now compare this with an algorithm that makes use of the gradient information.
Because∇E is a vector of length W, each evaluation of ∇E bringsWpieces of
information, and so we might hope to ﬁnd the minimum of the function in O(W)
gradient evaluations. As we shall see, by using error backpropagation, each such Chapter 8
evaluation takes only O(W)steps and so the minimum can now be found in O(W2)
steps. Although the quadratic approximation only holds in the neighbourhood of
a minimum, the efﬁciency gains are generic. For this reason, the use of gradient
information forms the basis of all practical algorithms for training neural networks.
7.2.2 Batch gradient descent
The simplest approach to using gradient information is to choose the weight up-
date in (7.15) such that there is a small step in the direction of the negative gradient,
so that
w()=w(−1)−∇E(w(−1)) (7.16)
where the parameter >0is known as the learning rate. After each such update, the
gradient is re-evaluated for the new weight vector w(+1)and the process repeated.
At each step, the weight vector is moved in the direction of the greatest rate of
decrease of the error function, and so this approach is known as gradient descent or
steepest descent. Note that the error function is deﬁned with respect to a training set,
and so to evaluate ∇E, each step requires that the entire training set be processed.
Techniques that use the whole data set at once are called batch methods.
7.2.3 Stochastic gradient descent
Deep learning methods beneﬁt greatly from very large data sets. However, batch
methods can become extremely inefﬁcient if there are many data points in the train-
ing set because each error function or gradient evaluation requires the entire data set

=== PAGE 231 (Book page ~214) ===
7.2. Gradient Descent Optimization 215
Algorithm 7.1: Stochastic gradient descent
Input: Training set of data points indexed by n∈{1;:::;N}
Error function per data point En(w)
Learning rate parameter 
Initial weight vector w
Output: Final weight vector w
n←1
repeat
w←w−∇En(w)// update weight vector
n←n+ 1(modN)// iterate over data
until convergence
return w
to be processed. To ﬁnd a more efﬁcient approach, note that error functions based on
maximum likelihood for a set of independent observations comprise a sum of terms,
one for each data point:
E(w) =N/summationdisplay
n=1En(w): (7.17)
The most widely used training algorithms for large data sets are based on a sequential
version of gradient descent known as stochastic gradient descent (Bottou, 2010), or
SGD, which updates the weight vector based on one data point at a time, so that
w()=w(−1)−∇En(w(−1)): (7.18)
This update is repeated by cycling through the data. A complete pass through the
whole training set is known as a training epoch. This technique is also known as
online gradient descent, especially if the data arises from a continuous stream of
new data points. Stochastic gradient descent is summarized in Algorithm 7.1.
A further advantage of stochastic gradient descent, compared to batch gradient
descent, is that it handles redundancy in the data much more efﬁciently. To see this,
consider an extreme example in which we take a data set and double its size by
duplicating every data point. Note that this simply multiplies the error function by
a factor of 2 and so is equivalent to using the original error function, if the value of
the learning rate is adjusted to compensate. Batch methods will require double the
computational effort to evaluate the batch error function gradient, whereas stochastic
gradient descent will be unaffected. Another property of stochastic gradient descent
is the possibility of escaping from local minima, since a stationary point with respect
to the error function for the whole data set will generally not be a stationary point
for each data point individually.

=== PAGE 232 (Book page ~215) ===
216 7. GRADIENT DESCENT
7.2.4 Mini-batches
A downside of stochastic gradient descent is that the gradient of the error func-
tion computed from a single data point provides a very noisy estimate of the gradient
of the error function computed on the full data set. We can consider an interme-
diate approach in which a small subset of data points, called a mini-batch, is used
to evaluate the gradient at each iteration. In determining the optimum size for the
mini-batch, note that the error in computing the mean from Nsamples is given by
=√
Nwhereis the standard deviation of the distribution generating the data. This Exercise 7.8
indicates that there are diminishing returns in estimating the true gradient from in-
creasing the batch size. If we increase the size of the mini-batch by a factor of 100
then the error only reduces by a factor of 10. Another consideration in choosing the
mini-batch size is the desire to make efﬁcient use of the hardware architecture on
which the code is running. For example, on some hardware platforms, mini-batch
sizes that are powers of 2 (for example, 64, 128, 256, . . . ) work well.
One important consideration when using mini-batches is that the constituent data
points should be chosen randomly from the data set, since in raw data sets there
may be correlations between successive data points arising from the way the data
was collected (for example, if the data points have been ordered alphabetically or
by date). This is often handled by randomly shufﬂing the entire data set and then
subsequently drawing mini-batches as successive blocks of data. The data set can
also be reshufﬂed between iterations through the data set, so that each mini-batch is
unlikely to have been used before, which can help escape local minima. The variant
of stochastic gradient descent with mini-batches is summarized in Algorithm 7.2.
Note that the learning algorithm is often still called ‘stochastic gradient descent’
even when mini-batches are used.
7.2.5 Parameter initialization
Iterative algorithms such as gradient descent require that we choose some ini-
tial setting for the parameters being learned. The speciﬁc initialization can have a
signiﬁcant effect on how long it takes to reach a solution and on the generalization
performance of the resulting trained network. Unfortunately, there is relatively little
theory to guide the initialization strategy.
One key consideration, however, is symmetry breaking. Consider a set of hidden
units or output units that take the same inputs. If the parameters were all initialized
with the same value, for example if they were all set to zero, the parameters of these
units would all be updated in unison and the units would each compute the same
function and hence be redundant. This problem can be addressed by initializing
parameters randomly from some distribution to break symmetry. If computational
resources permit, the network might be trained multiple times starting from different
random initializations and the results compared on held-out data.
The distribution used to initialize the weights is typically either a uniform distri-
bution in the range [−; ]or a zero-mean Gaussian of the form N(0;2). The choice
of the value of is important, and various heuristics to select it have been proposed.
One widely used approach is called He initialization (Heet al., 2015b). Consider a

=== PAGE 233 (Book page ~216) ===
7.2. Gradient Descent Optimization 217
Algorithm 7.2: Mini-batch stochastic gradient descent
Input: Training set of data points indexed by n∈{1;:::;N}
Batch sizeB
Error function per mini-batch En:n+B−1(w)
Learning rate parameter 
Initial weight vector w
Output: Final weight vector w
n←1
repeat
w←w−∇En:n+B−1(w)// weight vector update
n←n+B
ifn>N then
shufﬂe data
n←1
end if
until convergence
return w
network in which layer levaluates the following transformations
a(l)
i=M/summationdisplay
j=1wijz(l−1)
j (7.19)
z(l)
i= ReLU(a(l)
i) (7.20)
whereMis the number of units that send connections to unit i, and the ReLU activa-
tion function is given by (6.17). Suppose we initialize the weights using a Gaussian
N(0;2), and suppose that the outputs z(l−1)
j of the units in layer l−1have variance
2. Then we can easily show that Exercise 7.9
E[a(l)
i] = 0 (7.21)
var[z(l)
j] =M
222(7.22)
where the factor of 1=2arises from the ReLU activation function. Ideally we want
to ensure that the variance of the pre-activations neither decays to zero nor grows
signiﬁcantly as we propagate from one layer to the next. If we therefore require that
the units at layer lalso have variance 2then we arrive at the following choice for
the standard deviation of the Gaussian used to initialize the weights that feed into a

=== PAGE 234 (Book page ~217) ===
218 7.
GRADIENT DESCENT
Figure 7.3 Schematic illustration of ﬁxed-step gradient
descent for an error function that has substantially differ-
ent curvatures along different directions. The error sur-
faceEhas the form of a long valley, as depicted by the
ellipses. Note that, for most points in weight space, the lo-
cal negative gradient vector −∇E does not point towards
the minimum of the error function. Successive steps of
gradient descent can therefore oscillate across the valley,
leading to very slow progress along the valley towards the
minimum. The vectors u1andu2are the eigenvectors of
the Hessian matrix.
u1u2
unit
withMinputs:
=/radicalbigg
2
M: (7.23)
It
is also possible to treat the scale of the initialization distribution as a hyper-
parameter and to explore different values across multiple training runs. The bias pa-
rameters are typically set to small positive values to ensure that most pre-activations
are initially active during learning. This is particularly helpful with ReLU units,
where we want the pre-activations to be positive so that there is a non-zero gradient
to drive learning.
Another important class of techniques for initializing the parameters of a neural
network is by using the values that result from training the network on a different
task or by exploiting various forms of unsupervised training. These techniques fall
into the broad class of transfer learning techniques. Section 6.3.4
7.3. Con
vergence
When
applying gradient descent in practice, we need to choose a value for the learn-
ing rate parameter . Consider the simple error surface depicted in Figure 7.3 for a
hypothetical two-dimensional weight space in which the curvature of Evaries sig-
niﬁcantly with direction, creating a ‘valley’. At most points on the error surface, the
local gradient vector for batch gradient descent, which is perpendicular to the local
contour, does not point directly towards the minimum. Intuitively we might expect
that increasing the value of should lead to bigger steps through weight space and
hence faster convergence. However, the successive steps oscillate back and forth
across the valley, and if we increase too much, those oscillations will become di-
vergent. Because must be kept sufﬁciently small to avoid divergent oscillations
across the valley, progress along the valley is very slow. Gradient descent then takes
many small steps to reach the minimum and is a very inefﬁcient procedure.
We can gain deeper insight into the nature of this problem by considering the
quadratic approximation to the error function in the neighbourhood of the minimum. Section 7.1.1
From (7.7), (7.8), and (7.10), the gradient of the error function in this approximation

=== PAGE 235 (Book page ~218) ===
7.3.
Convergence 219
can be written as
∇E=/summationdisplay
iiiui: (7.24)
Again using (7.10) we can express the change in the weight vector in terms of corre-
sponding changes in the coefﬁcients {i}:
∆w=/summationdisplay
i∆iui: (7.25)
Combining (7.24) with (7.25) and the gradient descent formula (7.16) and using the
orthonormality relation (7.9) for the eigenvectors of the Hessian, we obtain the fol-
lowing expression for the change in iat each step of the gradient descent algorithm:
∆i=−ii (7.26)
from which it follows that Exercise 7.10
new
i= (1−i)old
i (7.27)
where ‘old’ and ‘new’ denote values before and after a weight update. Using the
orthonormality relation (7.9) for the eigenvectors together with (7.10), we have
uT
i(w−w?) =i (7.28)
and soican be interpreted as the distance to the minimum along the direction ui.
From (7.27) we see that these distances evolve independently such that, at each step,
the distance along the direction of uiis multiplied by a factor (1−i). After a total
ofTsteps we have
(T)
i= (1−i)T(0)
i: (7.29)
It follows that, provided |1−i|<1, the limitT→∞ leads toi= 0, which
from (7.28) shows that w=w?and so the weight vector has reached the minimum
of the error.
Note that (7.29) demonstrates that gradient descent leads to linear convergence
in the neighbourhood of a minimum. Also, convergence to the stationary point re-
quires that all the ibe positive, which in turn implies that the stationary point is
indeed a minimum. By making larger we can make the factor (1−i)smaller
and hence improve the speed of convergence. There is a limit to how large can
be made, however. We can permit (1−i)to go negative (which gives oscillating
values ofi), but we must ensure that |1−i|<1otherwise the ivalues will
diverge. This limits the value of to <2=maxwheremaxis the largest of the
eigenvalues. The rate of convergence, however, is dominated by the smallest eigen-
value, so with set to its largest permitted value, the convergence along the direction
corresponding to the smallest eigenvalue (the long axis of the ellipse in Figure 7.3)
will be governed by/parenleftbigg
1−2min
max/parenrightbigg
(7.30)

=== PAGE 236 (Book page ~219) ===
220 7.
GRADIENT DESCENT
wE∆w(1)
∆w(2)
∆w(3)
Figure
7.4 With a ﬁxed learning rate parameter, gradient descent down a surface with low curvature
leads to successively smaller steps corresponding to linear convergence. In such a sit-
uation, the effect of a momentum term is like an increase in the effective learning rate
parameter.
whereminis the smallest eigenvalue. If the ratio min=max(whose reciprocal
is known as the condition number of the Hessian) is very small, corresponding to
highly elongated elliptical error contours as in Figure 7.3, then progress towards the
minimum will be extremely slow.
7.3.1 Momentum
One simple technique for dealing with the problem of widely differing eigenval-
ues is to add a momentum term to the gradient descent formula. This effectively adds
inertia to the motion through weight space and smooths out the oscillations depicted
inFigure 7.3. The modiﬁed gradient descent formula is given by
∆w(−1)=−∇E/parenleftbig
w(−1)/parenrightbig
+∆w(−2)(7.31)
whereis called the momentum parameter. The weight vector is then updated using
(7.15).
To understand the effect of the momentum term, consider ﬁrst the motion through
a region of weight space for which the error surface has relatively low curvature, as
indicated in Figure 7.4. If we make the approximation that the gradient is unchang-
ing, then we can apply (7.31) iteratively to a long series of weight updates, and then
sum the resulting arithmetic series to give
∆w=−∇E{1 ++2+:::} (7.32)
=−
1−∇
E (7.33)
and we see that the result of the momentum term is to increase the effective learning
rate fromto=(1−).
By contrast, in a region of high curvature in which gradient descent is oscillatory,
as indicated in Figure 7.5, successive contributions from the momentum term will