244

8. BACKPROPAGATION

Exercise 8.9

the conditional average of the target data. The quantity (yn − tn ) is then a random
variable with zero mean. If we assume that its value is uncorrelated with the value
of the second derivative term on the right-hand side of (8.39), then the whole term
will average to zero in the summation over n.
By neglecting the second term in (8.39), we arrive at the Levenberg–Marquardt
approximation, also known as the outer product approximation because the Hessian
matrix is built up from a sum of outer products of vectors, given by
H≃

Exercise 8.10

n=1

∇an ∇aT
n.

(8.40)

Evaluating the outer product approximation for the Hessian is straightforward as it
involves only first derivatives of the error function, which can be evaluated efficiently
in O(W ) steps using standard backpropagation. The elements of the matrix can then
be found in O(W 2 ) steps by simple multiplication. It is important to emphasize
that this approximation is likely to be valid only for a network that has been trained
appropriately, and that for a general network mapping, the second derivative terms
on the right-hand side of (8.39) will typically not be negligible.
For a cross-entropy error function for a network with logistic-sigmoid outputunit activation functions, the corresponding approximation is given by
H≃

Exercise 8.11
Exercise 8.12

N
X

N
X
n=1

yn (1 − yn )∇an ∇aT
n.

(8.41)

An analogous result can be obtained for multi-class networks having softmax outputunit activation functions. The outer product approximation can also be used to develop an efficient sequential procedure for approximating the inverse of a Hessian
(Hassibi and Stork, 1993).

8.2. Automatic Differentiation
Section 7.2.1

We have seen the importance of using gradient information to train neural networks
efficiently. There are essentially four ways in which the gradient of a neural network
error function can be evaluated.
The first approach, which formed the mainstay of neural networks for many
years, is to derive the backpropagation equations by hand and then to implement
them explicitly in software. If this is done carefully it results in efficient code that
gives precise results that are accurate to numerical precision. However, the process
of deriving the equations as well as the process of coding them both take time and are
prone to errors. It also results in some redundancy in the code because the forward
propagation equations are coded separately from the backpropagation equations. As
these often involve duplicated calculations, then if the model is altered, both the
forward and backward implementations need to be changed in unison. This effort

8.2. Automatic Differentiation

Section 8.1.4

245

can easily become a limitation on how quickly and effectively different architectures
can be explored empirically.
A second approach is to evaluate the gradients numerically using finite differences. This requires only a software implementation of the forward propagation
equations. One problem with numerical differentiation is that it has limited computational accuracy, although this is unlikely to be an issue for network training as
we may be using stochastic gradient descent in which each evaluation is only a very
noisy estimate of the local gradient. The main drawback of this approach is that it
scales poorly with the size of the network. However, the technique is useful for debugging other approaches, because the gradients are evaluated using only the forward
propagation code and so can be used to confirm the correctness of backpropagation
or other code used to evaluate gradients.
A third approach is called symbolic differentiation and makes use of specialist
software to automate the analytical manipulations that are done by hand in the first
approach. This process is an example of computer algebra or symbolic computation
and involves the automatic application of the rules of calculus, such as the chain
rule, in a completely mechanistic process. The resulting expressions are then implemented in standard software. An obvious advantage of this approach is that it avoids
human error in the manual derivation of the backpropagation equations. Moreover,
the gradients are again calculated to machine precision, and the poor scaling seen
with numerical differentiation is avoided. The major downside of symbolic differentiation, however, is that the resulting expressions for derivatives can become exponentially longer than the original function, with correspondingly long evaluation
times. Consider a function f (x) given by the product of u(x) and v(x). The function
and its derivative are given by
f (x) = u(x)v(x)
0

0

(8.42)
0

f (x) = u (x)v(x) + u(x)v (x).

(8.43)

We see that there is redundant computation in that u(x) and v(x) must be evaluated both for the calculation of f (x) and for f 0 (x). If the factors u(x) and v(x)
themselves involve factors, then we end up with a nested duplication of expressions,
which rapidly grow in complexity. This problem is called expression swell.
As a further illustration, consider a function that is structured like two layers of
a neural network (Grosse, 2018) with a single input x, a hidden unit with activation
z, and an output y in which
z = h(w1 x + b1 )
y = h(w2 z + b2 )

(8.44)
(8.45)

ζ(a) = ln (1 + exp(a)) .

(8.46)

where h(a) is the soft ReLU:

The overall function is therefore given by
y(x) = h (w2 h(w1 x + b1 ) + b2 )

(8.47)

246

8. BACKPROPAGATION

Exercise 8.13

and the derivative of the network output with respect to w1 , evaluated symbolically,
is given by

w2 x exp w1 x + b1 + b2 + w2 ln[1 + ew1 x+b1 ]
∂y
=
.
(8.48)
∂w1
(1 + ew1 x+b1 ) (1 + exp(b2 + w2 ln[1 + ew1 x+b1 ]))
As well as being significantly more complex than the original function, we also see
redundant computation where expressions such as w1 x + b1 occur in several places.
A further major drawback with symbolic differentiation is that it requires that
the expression to be differentiated is expressed in closed form. It therefore excludes
important control flow operations such as loops, recursions, conditional execution,
and procedure calls, which are valuable constructs that we might wish to use when
defining the network function.
We therefore turn to the fourth technique for evaluating derivatives in neural
networks called automatic differentiation, also known as ‘autodiff’ or ‘algorithmic
differentiation’ (Baydin et al., 2018). Unlike symbolic differentiation, the goal of
automatic differentiation is not to find a mathematical expression for the derivatives
but to have the computer automatically generate the code that implements the gradient calculations given only the code for the forward propagation equations. It
is accurate to machine precision, just as with symbolic differentiation, but is more
efficient because it is able to exploit intermediate variables used in the definition
of the forward propagation equations and thereby avoid redundant evaluations. It
is important to note that not only can automatic differentiation handle conventional
closed-form mathematical expressions but it can also deal with flow control elements
such as branches, loops, recursion, and procedure calls, and is therefore significantly
more powerful than symbolic differentiation. Automatic differentiation is a wellestablished field with broad applicability that was developed largely outside of the
machine learning community. Modern deep learning is a largely empirical process,
involving evaluating and comparing different architectures, and automatic differentiation therefore plays a key role in enabling this experimentation to be done accurately
and efficiently.
The key idea of automatic differentiation is to take the code that evaluates a function, for example the forward propagation equations that evaluate the error function
for a neural network, and augment the code with additional variables whose values
are accumulated during code execution to obtain the required derivatives. There are
two principal forms of automatic differentiation, known as forward mode and reverse mode. We start by looking at forward mode, which is conceptually somewhat
simpler.

8.2.1

Forward-mode automatic differentiation

In forward-mode automatic differentiation, we augment each intermediate variable zi , known as a ‘primal’ variable, involved in the evaluation of a function, such
as the error function of a neural network, with an additional variable representing
the value of some derivative of that variable, which we can denote żi , known as a
‘tangent’ variable. The tangent variables and their associated code are generated

247

8.2. Automatic Differentiation
Figure 8.4 Evaluation trace diagram showing
the steps involved in the numerical evaluation
of the function (8.49) using the primal equations
(8.50) to (8.56).

x1

v1 v2

exp(v3 )

v5 + v6

x1

v1

v3

v5

v7

x2

v2

v4

v6

x2

sin(v2 )

v3 − v4

f

automatically by the software environment. Instead of simply doing forward propagation to compute {zi }, the code now propagates tuples (zi , żi ) so that variables
and derivatives are evaluated in parallel. The original function is generally defined
in terms of elementary operators consisting of arithmetic operations and negation
as well as transcendental functions such as exponential, logarithm, and trigonometric functions, all of which have simple formulae for their derivatives. Using these
derivatives in combination with the chain rule of calculus allows the code used to
evaluate gradients to be constructed automatically.
As an example, consider the following function, which has two input variables:
f (x1 , x2 ) = x1 x2 + exp(x1 x2 ) − sin(x2 ).

(8.49)

When implemented in software, the code consists of a sequence of operations that
can be expressed as an evaluation trace of the underlying elementary operations.
This trace can be visualized in the form of a graph, as shown in Figure 8.4. Here we
have defined the following primal variables
v1 = x1
v2 = x2
v3 = v1 v2
v4 = sin(v2 )
v5 = exp(v3 )
v6 = v3 − v4
v7 = v5 + v6 .

(8.50)
(8.51)
(8.52)
(8.53)
(8.54)
(8.55)
(8.56)

Now suppose we wish to evaluate the derivative ∂f /∂x1 . We define the tangent
variables by v˙i = ∂vi /∂x1 . Expressions for evaluating these can be constructed
automatically using the chain rule of calculus:
v̇i =

X ∂vj ∂vi
X
∂vi
∂vi
=
=
v̇j
.
∂x1
∂x1 ∂vj
∂vj
j∈pa(i)

(8.57)

j∈pa(i)

where pa(i) denotes the set of parents of the node i in the evaluation trace diagram,
that is the set of variables with arrows pointing to node i. For example, in Figure 8.4
the parents of node v3 are nodes v1 and v2 . Applying (8.57) to the evaluation trace

248

8. BACKPROPAGATION

Figure 8.5 Extension of the example shown in
Figure 8.4 to a function with two outputs f1 and
f2 .

x1

v1 v 2

exp(v3 )

v5 + v 6

x1

v1

v3

v5

v7

f1

x2

v2

v4

v6

v8

f2

x2

sin(v2 )

v3 − v 4

v5 v6

equations (8.50) to (8.56), we obtain the following evaluation trace equations for the
tangent variables
v̇1 = 1
v̇2 = 0
v̇3 = v1 v̇2 + v̇1 v2
v̇4 = v̇2 cos(v2 )
v̇5 = v˙3 exp(v3 )
v̇6 = v̇3 − v̇4
v̇7 = v̇5 + v̇6 .

Exercise 8.17

(8.58)
(8.59)
(8.60)
(8.61)
(8.62)
(8.63)
(8.64)

We can summarize automatic differentiation for this example as follows. We
first write code to implement the evaluation of the primal variables, given by (8.50) to
(8.56). The associated equations and corresponding code for evaluating the tangent
variables (8.58) to (8.64) are generated automatically. To evaluate the derivative
∂f /∂x1 , we input specific values of x1 and x2 and the code then executes the primal
and tangent equations, numerically evaluating the tuples (vi , v̇i ) in sequence until
we obtain v̇5 , which is the required derivative.
Now consider an example with two outputs f1 (x1 , x2 ) and f2 (x1 , x2 ) where
f1 (x1 , x2 ) is defined by (8.49) and
f2 (x1 , x2 ) = (x1 x2 − sin(x2 )) exp(x1 x2 )

(8.65)

as illustrated by the evaluation trace diagram in Figure 8.5. We see that this involves only a small extension to the evaluation equations for the primal and tangent
variables, and so both ∂f1 /∂x1 and ∂f2 /∂x1 can be evaluated together in a single
forward pass. The downside, however, is that if we wish to evaluate derivatives with
respect to a different input variable x2 then we have to run a separate forward pass.
In general, if we have a function with D inputs and K outputs then a single pass
of forward-mode automatic differentiation produces a single column of the K × D
Jacobian matrix:


∂f1
∂f1
...
 ∂x1
∂xD 
 .
.. 
.


..
(8.66)
J =  ..
. .

 ∂fK
∂fK
...
∂x1
∂xD

8.2. Automatic Differentiation

249

To compute column j of the Jacobian, we need to initialize the forward pass of the
tangent equations by setting ẋj = 1 and ẋi = 0 for i 6= j. We can write this in vector
form as ẋ = ei where ei is the ith unit vector. To compute the full Jacobian matrix
we need D forward-mode passes. However, if we wish to evaluate the product of the
Jacobian with a vector r = (r1 , . . . , rD )T :
∂f1
 ∂x1
 .
J=
 ..
 ∂fK
∂x1


Exercise 8.18

...
..

.

...



∂f1
r1


∂xD 


.. 
  .. 
.  . 

∂fK  
rD
∂xD

(8.67)

then this can be done in single forward pass by setting ẋ = r.
We see that forward-mode automatic differentiation can evaluate the full K × D
Jacobian matrix of derivatives using D forward passes. This is very efficient for networks with a few inputs and many outputs, such that K  D. However, we often
operate in a regime where we often have just one function, namely the error function
used for training, and large numbers of variables that we want to differentiate with
respect to, comprising the weights and biases in the network, of which there may
be millions or billions. In such situations, forward-mode automatic differentiation is
extremely inefficient. We therefore turn to an alternative version of automatic differentiation based on the a backwards flow of derivative data through the evaluation
trace graph.

8.2.2

Reverse-mode automatic differentiation

We can think of reverse-mode automatic differentiation as a generalization of
the error backpropagation procedure. As with forward mode, we augment each intermediate variable vi with additional variables, in this case called adjoint variables,
denoted v i . Consider again a situation with a single output function f for which the
adjoint variables are defined by
∂f
.
(8.68)
vi =
∂vi
These can be evaluated sequentially starting with the output and working backwards
by using the chain rule of calculus:
vi =

X ∂f ∂vj
X
∂f
∂vj
vj
=
=
.
∂vi
∂vj ∂vi
∂vi
j∈ch(i)

Figure 8.1
Exercise 8.16

(8.69)

j∈ch(i)

Here ch(i) denotes the children of node i in the evaluation trace graph, in other
words the set of nodes that have arrows pointing into them from node i. The successive evaluation of the adjoint variables represents a flow of information backwards
through the graph, as we saw previously.
If we again consider the specific example function given by (8.50) to (8.56), we
obtain the following evaluation equations for the evaluation of the adjoint variables

250

8. BACKPROPAGATION
v7 = 1
v6 = v7
v5 = v7
v 4 = −v 6
v 3 = v 5 v5 + v 6
v 2 = v 2 v1 + v 4 cos(v2 )
v 1 = v 3 v2 .

Figure 8.5

Exercises

(8.70)
(8.71)
(8.72)
(8.73)
(8.74)
(8.75)
(8.76)

Note that these start at the output and then flow backwards through the graph to the
inputs. Even with multiple inputs, only a single backward pass is required to evaluate
the derivatives. For a neural network error function, the derivatives of E with respect
to the weight and biases are obtained as the corresponding adjoint variables. However, if we now have more than one output then we need to run a separate backward
pass for each output variable.
Reverse mode is often more memory intensive than forward mode because all
of the intermediate primal variables must be stored so that they will be available as
needed when evaluating the adjoint variables during the backward pass. By contrast,
with forward mode, the primal and tangent variables are computed together during
the forward pass, and therefore variables can be discarded once they have been used.
It is therefore also generally easier to implement forward mode compared to reverse
mode.
For both forward-mode and reverse-mode automatic differentiation, a single
pass through the network is guaranteed to take no more than 6 times the computational cost of a single function evaluation. In practice, the overhead is typically
closer to a factor of 2 or 3 (Griewank and Walther, 2008). Hybrids of forward and
reverse modes are also of interest. One situation in which this arises is in the evaluation of the product of a Hessian matrix with a vector, which can be calculated
without explicit evaluation of the full Hessian (Pearlmutter, 1994). Here we can use
reverse mode to calculate the gradient of code, which itself has been generated by the
forward model. We start from a vector b and a point x at which the Hessian–vector
product is to be evaluated. By setting ẋ = v and using forward mode, we obtain
the directional derivative vT ∇f . This is then differentiated using reverse mode to
obtain ∇2 f v = Hv. If W is the number of parameters in the neural network then
this evaluation has O(W ) complexity even though the Hessian is of size W × W .
The Hessian itself can also be evaluated explicitly using automatic differentiation
but this has O(W 2 ) complexity.

8.1 (?) By making use of (8.5), (8.6), (8.8), and (8.12), verify the backpropagation formula (8.13) for evaluating the derivatives of an error function.
8.2 (? ?) Consider a network that consists of layers and rewrite the backpropagation
formula (8.13) in matrix notation by starting with the forward propagation equation
(6.19). Note that the result involves multiplication by the transposes of the matrices.

Exercises

251

8.3 (?) By using a Taylor expansion, verify that the terms that are O() cancel on the
right-hand side of (8.25).
8.4 (? ?) Consider a two-layer network of the form shown in Figure 6.9 with the addition
of extra parameters corresponding to skip-layer connections that go directly from the
inputs to the outputs. By extending the discussion of Section 8.1.3, write down the
equations for the derivatives of the error function with respect to these additional
parameters.
8.5 (? ? ?) In Section 8.1.5, we derived a procedure for evaluating the Jacobian matrix of
a neural network using a backpropagation procedure. Derive an alternative formalism for finding the Jacobian based on forward propagation equations.
8.6 (? ? ?) Consider a two-layer neural network, and define the quantities
δk =

∂En
,
∂ak

Mkk0 ≡

∂ 2 En
.
∂ak ∂ak0

(8.77)

Derive expressions for the elements of the Hessian matrix expressed in terms of δk
and Mkk0 for elements in which (i) both weights are in the second layer, (ii) both
weights are in the first layer, and (iii) one weight is in each layer.
8.7 (? ? ?) Extend the results of Exercise 8.6 for the exact Hessian of a two-layer network
to include skip-layer connections that go directly from inputs to outputs.
8.8 (? ?) The outer product approximation to the Hessian matrix for a neural network using a sum-of-squares error function is given by (8.40). Extend this result for multiple
outputs.
8.9 (? ?) Consider a squared-loss function of the form
ZZ
1
2
E(w) =
{y(x, w) − t} p(x, t) dx dt
2

(8.78)

where y(x, w) is a parametric function such as a neural network. The result (4.37)
shows that the function y(x, w) that minimizes this error is given by the conditional
expectation of t given x. Use this result to show that the second derivative of E with
respect to two elements wr and ws of the vector w, is given by
Z
∂y ∂y
∂2E
=
p(x) dx.
(8.79)
∂wr ∂ws
∂wr ∂ws
Note that, for a finite sample from p(x), we obtain (8.40).
8.10 (? ?) Derive the expression (8.41) for the outer product approximation of a Hessian
matrix for a network having a single output with a logistic-sigmoid output-unit activation function and a cross-entropy error function, corresponding to the result (8.40)
for the sum-of-squares error function.

252

8. BACKPROPAGATION
8.11 (? ?) Derive an expression for the outer product approximation of a Hessian matrix
for a network having K outputs with a softmax output-unit activation function and
a cross-entropy error function, corresponding to the result (8.40) for the sum-ofsquares error function.
8.12 (? ? ?) Consider the matrix identity
M + vv


T −1

=M

−1


(M−1 v) vT M−1
−
,
1 + vT M−1 v

(8.80)

which is simply a special case of the Woodbury identity (A.7). By applying (8.80)
to the outer product approximation (8.40) for a Hessian matrix, derive a formula that
allows the inverse of the Hessian matrix to be computed by making one pass through
the training data and updating the inverse Hessian with each data point. Note that
the algorithm can initialized using H = αI where α is a small constant, and that the
results are not particularly sensitive to the precise value of α.
8.13 (? ?) Verify that the derivative of (8.47) is given by (8.48).
8.14 (? ?) The logistic map is a function defined by the iterative relation Ln+1 (x) =
4Ln (x) (1 − Ln (x)) with L1 (x) = x. Write down the evaluation trace equations for
L2 (x), L3 (x), and L4 (x), and then write down expressions for the corresponding
derivatives L01 (x), L02 (x), L03 (x), and L04 (x). Do not simplify the expressions but
instead simply note how the complexity of the formulae for the derivatives grows
much more rapidly than the expressions for the functions themselves.
8.15 (? ?) Starting from the evaluation trace equations (8.50) to (8.56) for the example
function (8.49), use (8.57) to derive the forward-mode tangent variable evaluation
equations (8.58) to (8.64).
8.16 (? ?) Starting from the evaluation trace equations (8.50) to (8.56) for the example
function (8.49), and referring to Figure 8.4, use (8.69) to derive the reverse-mode
adjoint variable evaluation equations (8.70) to (8.76).
8.17 (? ? ?) Consider the example function (8.49). Write down an expression for ∂f /∂x1
and evaluate this function for x1 = 1 and x2 = 2. Now use the evaluation trace equations (8.50) to (8.56) to evaluate the variables v1 to v7 and then use the evaluation
trace equations of forward-mode automatic differentiation to evaluate the tangent
variables v̇1 to v̇7 and to confirm that the resulting value of ∂f /∂x1 agrees with that
found directly. Similarly, use the evaluation trace equations of reverse-mode automatic differentiation (8.70) to (8.76) to evaluate the adjoint variables v 7 to v 1 and
again confirm that the resulting value of ∂f /∂x1 agrees with that found directly.
8.18 (? ?) By expressing an arbitrary vector r = (r1 , . . . , rD )T as a linear combination of
the unit vectors ei , where i = 1, . . . , D, show that the product of the Jacobian of a
function with r in the form (8.67) can be evaluated using a single pass of forwardmode automatic differentiation by setting ẋ = r.

9
Regularization

Section 1.2

We introduced the concept of regularization when discussing polynomial curve fitting as a way to reduce over-fitting by discouraging the parameters of the model from
taking values with a large magnitude. This involved adding a simple penalty term to
the error function to give a regularized error function in the form
λ
e
E(w)
= E(w) + wT w
2

Section 4.3

(9.1)

where w is the vector of model parameters, E(w) is the unregularized error function,
and the regularization hyperparameter λ controls the strength of the regularization
effect. An improvement in predictive accuracy with such a regularizer can be understood in terms of the bias–variance trade-off through the reduction in the variance of
the solution at the expense of some increase in bias. In this chapter we will explore
regularization in depth and will discuss several different approaches to regulariza© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
C. M. Bishop, H. Bishop, Deep Learning, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-45468-4_9

253

