Exercises

251

8.3 (?) By using a Taylor expansion, verify that the terms that are O() cancel on the
right-hand side of (8.25).
8.4 (? ?) Consider a two-layer network of the form shown in Figure 6.9 with the addition
of extra parameters corresponding to skip-layer connections that go directly from the
inputs to the outputs. By extending the discussion of Section 8.1.3, write down the
equations for the derivatives of the error function with respect to these additional
parameters.
8.5 (? ? ?) In Section 8.1.5, we derived a procedure for evaluating the Jacobian matrix of
a neural network using a backpropagation procedure. Derive an alternative formalism for finding the Jacobian based on forward propagation equations.
8.6 (? ? ?) Consider a two-layer neural network, and define the quantities
δk =

∂En
,
∂ak

Mkk0 ≡

∂ 2 En
.
∂ak ∂ak0

(8.77)

Derive expressions for the elements of the Hessian matrix expressed in terms of δk
and Mkk0 for elements in which (i) both weights are in the second layer, (ii) both
weights are in the first layer, and (iii) one weight is in each layer.
8.7 (? ? ?) Extend the results of Exercise 8.6 for the exact Hessian of a two-layer network
to include skip-layer connections that go directly from inputs to outputs.
8.8 (? ?) The outer product approximation to the Hessian matrix for a neural network using a sum-of-squares error function is given by (8.40). Extend this result for multiple
outputs.
8.9 (? ?) Consider a squared-loss function of the form
ZZ
1
2
E(w) =
{y(x, w) − t} p(x, t) dx dt
2

(8.78)

where y(x, w) is a parametric function such as a neural network. The result (4.37)
shows that the function y(x, w) that minimizes this error is given by the conditional
expectation of t given x. Use this result to show that the second derivative of E with
respect to two elements wr and ws of the vector w, is given by
Z
∂y ∂y
∂2E
=
p(x) dx.
(8.79)
∂wr ∂ws
∂wr ∂ws
Note that, for a finite sample from p(x), we obtain (8.40).
8.10 (? ?) Derive the expression (8.41) for the outer product approximation of a Hessian
matrix for a network having a single output with a logistic-sigmoid output-unit activation function and a cross-entropy error function, corresponding to the result (8.40)
for the sum-of-squares error function.

252

8. BACKPROPAGATION
8.11 (? ?) Derive an expression for the outer product approximation of a Hessian matrix
for a network having K outputs with a softmax output-unit activation function and
a cross-entropy error function, corresponding to the result (8.40) for the sum-ofsquares error function.
8.12 (? ? ?) Consider the matrix identity
M + vv


T −1

=M

−1


(M−1 v) vT M−1
−
,
1 + vT M−1 v

(8.80)

which is simply a special case of the Woodbury identity (A.7). By applying (8.80)
to the outer product approximation (8.40) for a Hessian matrix, derive a formula that
allows the inverse of the Hessian matrix to be computed by making one pass through
the training data and updating the inverse Hessian with each data point. Note that
the algorithm can initialized using H = αI where α is a small constant, and that the
results are not particularly sensitive to the precise value of α.
8.13 (? ?) Verify that the derivative of (8.47) is given by (8.48).
8.14 (? ?) The logistic map is a function defined by the iterative relation Ln+1 (x) =
4Ln (x) (1 − Ln (x)) with L1 (x) = x. Write down the evaluation trace equations for
L2 (x), L3 (x), and L4 (x), and then write down expressions for the corresponding
derivatives L01 (x), L02 (x), L03 (x), and L04 (x). Do not simplify the expressions but
instead simply note how the complexity of the formulae for the derivatives grows
much more rapidly than the expressions for the functions themselves.
8.15 (? ?) Starting from the evaluation trace equations (8.50) to (8.56) for the example
function (8.49), use (8.57) to derive the forward-mode tangent variable evaluation
equations (8.58) to (8.64).
8.16 (? ?) Starting from the evaluation trace equations (8.50) to (8.56) for the example
function (8.49), and referring to Figure 8.4, use (8.69) to derive the reverse-mode
adjoint variable evaluation equations (8.70) to (8.76).
8.17 (? ? ?) Consider the example function (8.49). Write down an expression for ∂f /∂x1
and evaluate this function for x1 = 1 and x2 = 2. Now use the evaluation trace equations (8.50) to (8.56) to evaluate the variables v1 to v7 and then use the evaluation
trace equations of forward-mode automatic differentiation to evaluate the tangent
variables v̇1 to v̇7 and to confirm that the resulting value of ∂f /∂x1 agrees with that
found directly. Similarly, use the evaluation trace equations of reverse-mode automatic differentiation (8.70) to (8.76) to evaluate the adjoint variables v 7 to v 1 and
again confirm that the resulting value of ∂f /∂x1 agrees with that found directly.
8.18 (? ?) By expressing an arbitrary vector r = (r1 , . . . , rD )T as a linear combination of
the unit vectors ei , where i = 1, . . . , D, show that the product of the Jacobian of a
function with r in the form (8.67) can be evaluated using a single pass of forwardmode automatic differentiation by setting ẋ = r.

9
Regularization

Section 1.2

We introduced the concept of regularization when discussing polynomial curve fitting as a way to reduce over-fitting by discouraging the parameters of the model from
taking values with a large magnitude. This involved adding a simple penalty term to
the error function to give a regularized error function in the form
λ
e
E(w)
= E(w) + wT w
2

Section 4.3

(9.1)

where w is the vector of model parameters, E(w) is the unregularized error function,
and the regularization hyperparameter λ controls the strength of the regularization
effect. An improvement in predictive accuracy with such a regularizer can be understood in terms of the bias–variance trade-off through the reduction in the variance of
the solution at the expense of some increase in bias. In this chapter we will explore
regularization in depth and will discuss several different approaches to regulariza© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
C. M. Bishop, H. Bishop, Deep Learning, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-45468-4_9

253

254

9. REGULARIZATION
tion. We will also look more broadly at the important role of bias in achieving good
generalization from finite training data sets.
In a practical application, it is very unlikely that the process that generates the
data will correspond precisely to a particular neural network architecture, and so
any given neural network will only ever represent an approximation to the true data
generator. Larger networks can provide closer approximations, but this comes at the
risk of over-fitting. In practice, we find that the best generalization results are almost
always obtained by using a larger network combined with some form of regularization. In this chapter we explore several alternative regularization techniques including early stopping, model averaging, dropout, data augmentation, and parameter
sharing. Multiple forms of regularization can be used together if desired. For example, error function regularization of the form (9.1) is often used alongside dropout.

9.1. Inductive Bias
Section 1.2.4

Section 1.2.5
Section 4.3

When we compared the predictive error of polynomials of various orders for the sinusoidal synthetic data problem, we saw that the smallest generalization error was
achieved using a polynomial of intermediate complexity, being neither too simple
nor too flexible. A similar result was found when we used a regularization term of
the form (9.1) to control model complexity, as an intermediate value of the regularization coefficient λ gave the best predictions for new input values. Insight into this
result came from the bias–variance decomposition, where we saw that an appropriate
level of bias in the model was important to allow generalization from finite data sets.
Simple models with high bias are unable to capture the variation in the underlying
data generation process, whereas highly flexible models with low bias are prone to
over-fitting leading to poor generalization. As the size of the data set grows, we can
afford to use more flexible models having less bias without incurring excessive variance, thereby leading to improved generalization. Note that in a practical setting, our
choice of model might also be influenced by factors such as memory usage or speed
of execution. Here we ignore such ancillary considerations and focus on the core
goal of achieving good predictive performance, in other words good generalization.

9.1.1

Inverse problems

This issue of model choice lies at the heart of machine learning and can be
traced to the fact that most machine learning tasks are examples of inverse problems. Given a conditional distribution p(t|x) along with a finite set of input points
{x1 , . . . , xN }, it is straightforward, at least in principle, to sample corresponding
values {t1 , . . . , tN } from that distribution. In machine learning, however, we have
to solve the inverse of this problem, namely to infer an entire distribution given only a
finite number of samples. This is intrinsically ill-posed, as there are infinitely many
distributions which could potentially have been responsible for generating the observed training data. In fact any distribution that has a non-zero probability density
at the observed target values is a candidate.

9.1. Inductive Bias

Chapter 10

Section 6.3.4

For machine learning to be useful, however, we need to make predictions for
new values of x, and therefore we need a way to choose a specific distribution from
amongst the infinitely many possibilities. The preference for one choice over others is called inductive bias, or prior knowledge, and plays a central role in machine
learning. Prior knowledge may come from background information that helps constrain the space of solutions. For many applications, small changes in the input
values should lead to small changes in the output values, and so we should bias our
solutions towards those with smoothly varying functions. Regularization terms of
the form (9.1) encourage the model weights to have a smaller magnitude and hence
introduce a bias towards functions that vary more slowly with changes in the inputs.
Likewise, when detecting objects in images, we can introduce prior knowledge that
the identity of an object is generally independent of its location within the image.
This is known as translation invariance, and incorporating this into our solution can
greatly simplify the task of building a system with good generalization. However,
care must be taken not to incorporate biases or constraints that are inconsistent with
the underlying process that generates the data. For example, assuming that the relationship between outputs and inputs is linear when in fact there are significant
nonlinearities can lead to a system that produces inaccurate answers.
Techniques such as transfer learning and multi-task learning can also be viewed
from the perspective of regularization. When training data for a particular task is
limited, additional data from a different, but related, task can be used to help determine the learnable parameters in a neural network. The assumption of similarity
between the tasks represents a more sophisticated form of inductive bias compared
to simple regularization, and this explains the improved performance resulting from
the use of the additional data.

9.1.2

Chapter 10

255

No free lunch theorem

The core focus of this book is on the important class of machine learning models called deep neural networks. These are highly flexible models and have revolutionized many fields including computer vision, speech recognition, and natural
language processing. In fact, they have become the framework of choice for the
great majority of machine learning applications. It might appear, therefore, that they
represent a ‘universal’ learning algorithm able to solve all tasks. However, even very
flexible neural networks contain important inductive biases. For example, convolutional neural networks encode specific forms of inductive bias, including translation
equivariance, that are especially useful in applications involving images.
The no free lunch theorem (Wolpert, 1996), named from the expression ‘There’s
no such thing as a free lunch,’ states that every learning algorithm is as good as any
other when averaged over all possible problems. If a particular model or algorithm
is better than average on some problems, it must be worse than average on others.
However, this is a rather theoretical notion as the space of possible problems here
includes relationships between input and output that would be very uncharacteristic
of any plausible practical application. For example, we have already noted that most
examples of practical interest exhibit some degree of smoothness, in which small
changes in the input values are associated, for the most part, with small changes in

256

Chapter 7

9. REGULARIZATION
the target values. Models such as neural networks, and indeed most widely used
machine learning techniques, exhibit this form of inductive bias, and therefore to
some degree, they have broad applicability.
Although the no free lunch theorem is somewhat theoretical, it does highlight
the central importance of bias in determining the performance of a machine learning
algorithm. It is not possible to learn ‘purely from data’ in the absence of any bias. In
practice, bias may be implicit. For example, every neural network has a finite number
of parameters, which therefore limits the functions that it can represent. However,
bias may also be encoded explicitly as a reflection of prior knowledge relating to the
specific type of problem being solved.
In trying to find general-purpose learning algorithms, we are really seeking inductive biases that are appropriate to the broad classes of applications that will be
encountered in practice. For any given application, however, better results can be obtained if it is possible to incorporate stronger inductive biases that are specific to that
application. The perspective of model-based machine learning (Winn et al., 2023)
advocates making all the assumptions in machine learning models explicit so that
the appropriate choices can be made for inductive biases.
We have seen that inductive bias can be incorporated through the form of distribution, for example by specifying that the output is a linear function of a fixed
set of specific basis functions. It can also be incorporated through the addition of
a regularization term to the error function used during training. Yet another way to
control the complexity of a neural network is through the training process itself. We
will see that deep neural networks can give good generalization even when the number of adjustable parameters exceeds the number of training data points, provided
the training process is set up correctly. Part of the skill in applying deep learning to
real-world problems is in the careful design of inductive bias and the incorporation
of prior knowledge.

9.1.3

Symmetry and invariance

In many applications of machine learning, the predictions should be unchanged,
or invariant, under one or more transformations of the input variables. For example,
when classifying an object in two-dimensional images, such as a cat or dog, a particular object should be assigned the same classification irrespective of its position
within the image. This is known as translation invariance. Likewise changes to the
size of the object within the image should also leave its classification unchanged.
This is called scale invariance. Exploiting such symmetries to create inductive biases can greatly improve the performance of machine learning models and forms the
subject of geometric deep learning (Bronstein et al., 2021).
Transformations, such as a translation or scaling, that leave particular properties
unchanged, represent symmetries. The set of all transformations corresponding to a
particular symmetry form a mathematical structure called a group. A group consists
of a set of elements A, B, C, . . . together with a binary operation for composing pairs
of elements together, which we denote using the notation A ◦ B. The following four
axioms hold for a group:

