9
Regularization

Section 1.2

We introduced the concept of regularization when discussing polynomial curve fitting as a way to reduce over-fitting by discouraging the parameters of the model from
taking values with a large magnitude. This involved adding a simple penalty term to
the error function to give a regularized error function in the form
λ
e
E(w)
= E(w) + wT w
2

Section 4.3

(9.1)

where w is the vector of model parameters, E(w) is the unregularized error function,
and the regularization hyperparameter λ controls the strength of the regularization
effect. An improvement in predictive accuracy with such a regularizer can be understood in terms of the bias–variance trade-off through the reduction in the variance of
the solution at the expense of some increase in bias. In this chapter we will explore
regularization in depth and will discuss several different approaches to regulariza© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
C. M. Bishop, H. Bishop, Deep Learning, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-45468-4_9

253

254

9. REGULARIZATION
tion. We will also look more broadly at the important role of bias in achieving good
generalization from finite training data sets.
In a practical application, it is very unlikely that the process that generates the
data will correspond precisely to a particular neural network architecture, and so
any given neural network will only ever represent an approximation to the true data
generator. Larger networks can provide closer approximations, but this comes at the
risk of over-fitting. In practice, we find that the best generalization results are almost
always obtained by using a larger network combined with some form of regularization. In this chapter we explore several alternative regularization techniques including early stopping, model averaging, dropout, data augmentation, and parameter
sharing. Multiple forms of regularization can be used together if desired. For example, error function regularization of the form (9.1) is often used alongside dropout.

9.1. Inductive Bias
Section 1.2.4

Section 1.2.5
Section 4.3

When we compared the predictive error of polynomials of various orders for the sinusoidal synthetic data problem, we saw that the smallest generalization error was
achieved using a polynomial of intermediate complexity, being neither too simple
nor too flexible. A similar result was found when we used a regularization term of
the form (9.1) to control model complexity, as an intermediate value of the regularization coefficient λ gave the best predictions for new input values. Insight into this
result came from the bias–variance decomposition, where we saw that an appropriate
level of bias in the model was important to allow generalization from finite data sets.
Simple models with high bias are unable to capture the variation in the underlying
data generation process, whereas highly flexible models with low bias are prone to
over-fitting leading to poor generalization. As the size of the data set grows, we can
afford to use more flexible models having less bias without incurring excessive variance, thereby leading to improved generalization. Note that in a practical setting, our
choice of model might also be influenced by factors such as memory usage or speed
of execution. Here we ignore such ancillary considerations and focus on the core
goal of achieving good predictive performance, in other words good generalization.

9.1.1

Inverse problems

This issue of model choice lies at the heart of machine learning and can be
traced to the fact that most machine learning tasks are examples of inverse problems. Given a conditional distribution p(t|x) along with a finite set of input points
{x1 , . . . , xN }, it is straightforward, at least in principle, to sample corresponding
values {t1 , . . . , tN } from that distribution. In machine learning, however, we have
to solve the inverse of this problem, namely to infer an entire distribution given only a
finite number of samples. This is intrinsically ill-posed, as there are infinitely many
distributions which could potentially have been responsible for generating the observed training data. In fact any distribution that has a non-zero probability density
at the observed target values is a candidate.

9.1. Inductive Bias

Chapter 10

Section 6.3.4

For machine learning to be useful, however, we need to make predictions for
new values of x, and therefore we need a way to choose a specific distribution from
amongst the infinitely many possibilities. The preference for one choice over others is called inductive bias, or prior knowledge, and plays a central role in machine
learning. Prior knowledge may come from background information that helps constrain the space of solutions. For many applications, small changes in the input
values should lead to small changes in the output values, and so we should bias our
solutions towards those with smoothly varying functions. Regularization terms of
the form (9.1) encourage the model weights to have a smaller magnitude and hence
introduce a bias towards functions that vary more slowly with changes in the inputs.
Likewise, when detecting objects in images, we can introduce prior knowledge that
the identity of an object is generally independent of its location within the image.
This is known as translation invariance, and incorporating this into our solution can
greatly simplify the task of building a system with good generalization. However,
care must be taken not to incorporate biases or constraints that are inconsistent with
the underlying process that generates the data. For example, assuming that the relationship between outputs and inputs is linear when in fact there are significant
nonlinearities can lead to a system that produces inaccurate answers.
Techniques such as transfer learning and multi-task learning can also be viewed
from the perspective of regularization. When training data for a particular task is
limited, additional data from a different, but related, task can be used to help determine the learnable parameters in a neural network. The assumption of similarity
between the tasks represents a more sophisticated form of inductive bias compared
to simple regularization, and this explains the improved performance resulting from
the use of the additional data.

9.1.2

Chapter 10

255

No free lunch theorem

The core focus of this book is on the important class of machine learning models called deep neural networks. These are highly flexible models and have revolutionized many fields including computer vision, speech recognition, and natural
language processing. In fact, they have become the framework of choice for the
great majority of machine learning applications. It might appear, therefore, that they
represent a ‘universal’ learning algorithm able to solve all tasks. However, even very
flexible neural networks contain important inductive biases. For example, convolutional neural networks encode specific forms of inductive bias, including translation
equivariance, that are especially useful in applications involving images.
The no free lunch theorem (Wolpert, 1996), named from the expression ‘There’s
no such thing as a free lunch,’ states that every learning algorithm is as good as any
other when averaged over all possible problems. If a particular model or algorithm
is better than average on some problems, it must be worse than average on others.
However, this is a rather theoretical notion as the space of possible problems here
includes relationships between input and output that would be very uncharacteristic
of any plausible practical application. For example, we have already noted that most
examples of practical interest exhibit some degree of smoothness, in which small
changes in the input values are associated, for the most part, with small changes in

256

Chapter 7

9. REGULARIZATION
the target values. Models such as neural networks, and indeed most widely used
machine learning techniques, exhibit this form of inductive bias, and therefore to
some degree, they have broad applicability.
Although the no free lunch theorem is somewhat theoretical, it does highlight
the central importance of bias in determining the performance of a machine learning
algorithm. It is not possible to learn ‘purely from data’ in the absence of any bias. In
practice, bias may be implicit. For example, every neural network has a finite number
of parameters, which therefore limits the functions that it can represent. However,
bias may also be encoded explicitly as a reflection of prior knowledge relating to the
specific type of problem being solved.
In trying to find general-purpose learning algorithms, we are really seeking inductive biases that are appropriate to the broad classes of applications that will be
encountered in practice. For any given application, however, better results can be obtained if it is possible to incorporate stronger inductive biases that are specific to that
application. The perspective of model-based machine learning (Winn et al., 2023)
advocates making all the assumptions in machine learning models explicit so that
the appropriate choices can be made for inductive biases.
We have seen that inductive bias can be incorporated through the form of distribution, for example by specifying that the output is a linear function of a fixed
set of specific basis functions. It can also be incorporated through the addition of
a regularization term to the error function used during training. Yet another way to
control the complexity of a neural network is through the training process itself. We
will see that deep neural networks can give good generalization even when the number of adjustable parameters exceeds the number of training data points, provided
the training process is set up correctly. Part of the skill in applying deep learning to
real-world problems is in the careful design of inductive bias and the incorporation
of prior knowledge.

9.1.3

Symmetry and invariance

In many applications of machine learning, the predictions should be unchanged,
or invariant, under one or more transformations of the input variables. For example,
when classifying an object in two-dimensional images, such as a cat or dog, a particular object should be assigned the same classification irrespective of its position
within the image. This is known as translation invariance. Likewise changes to the
size of the object within the image should also leave its classification unchanged.
This is called scale invariance. Exploiting such symmetries to create inductive biases can greatly improve the performance of machine learning models and forms the
subject of geometric deep learning (Bronstein et al., 2021).
Transformations, such as a translation or scaling, that leave particular properties
unchanged, represent symmetries. The set of all transformations corresponding to a
particular symmetry form a mathematical structure called a group. A group consists
of a set of elements A, B, C, . . . together with a binary operation for composing pairs
of elements together, which we denote using the notation A ◦ B. The following four
axioms hold for a group:

9.1. Inductive Bias

257

1. Closed: For any two elements A, B in the set, A ◦ B must also be in the set.
2. Associative: For any three elements A, B, C in the set, (A◦B)◦C = A◦(B◦C).
3. Identity: There exists an element I of the set, called the identity, with the
property: A ◦ I = I ◦ A = A for every element A in the set.
4. Inverse: For each element A in the set, there exists another element in the
set, which we denote by A−1 , called the inverse, which has the property: A ◦
A−1 = A−1 ◦ A = I.
Exercise 9.1

Simple examples of groups include the set of rotations of a square through multiples
of 90◦ or the set of continuous translations of an object in a two-dimensional plane.
In principle, invariance of the predictions made by a neural network to transformations of the input space could be learned from data, without any special modifications to the network or the training procedure. In practice, however, this can
prove to be extremely challenging because such transformations can produce substantial changes in the raw data. For example, relatively small translations of an
object within an image, even by a few pixels, can cause pixel values to change significantly. Furthermore, multiple invariances must often hold at the same time, for
example invariance to translations in two dimensions as well as scaling, rotation,
changes of intensity, changes of colour balance, and many others. There are exponentially many possible combinations of such transformations, making the size of
the required training set needed to learn all of these invariances prohibitive.
We therefore seek more efficient approaches for encouraging an adaptive model
to exhibit the required invariances. These can broadly be divided into four categories:
1. Pre-processing. Invariances are built into a pre-processing stage by computing
features of the data that are invariant under the required transformations. Any
subsequent regression or classification system that uses such features as inputs
will necessarily also respect these invariances.
2. Regularized error function. A regularization term is added to the error function to penalize changes in the model output when the input is subject to one
of the invariant transformations.
3. Data augmentation. The training set is expanded using replicas of the training
data points, transformed according to the desired invariances and carrying the
same output target values as the untransformed examples.
4. Network architecture. The invariance properties are built into the structure
of a neural network through an appropriate choice of network architecture.

Chapter 6

One challenge with approach 1 is to design features that exhibit the required
invariances without also discarding information that can be useful for determining
the network outputs. We have already seen that fixed, hand-crafted features have
limited capabilities and have been superseded by learned representations obtained
using deep neural networks.

258

9. REGULARIZATION

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

(h)

Figure 9.1 Illustration of data set augmentation, showing (a) the original image, (b) horizontal inversion, (c)
scaling, (d) translation, (e) rotation, (f) brightness and contrast change, (g) additive noise, and (h) colour shift.

An example of approach 2 is the technique of tangent propagation (Simard et al.,
1992) in which a regularisation term is added to the error function during training.
This term directly penalizes changes in the output resulting from changes in the input
variables that correspond to one of the invariant transformations. A limitation of this
technique, in addition to the extra complexity of training, is can only cope with small
transformations (e.g., translations by less than a pixel).
Approach 3 is known as data set augmentation. It is often relatively easy to
implement and can prove to be very effective in practice. It is often applied in the
context of image analysis as it straightforward to create the transformed training data.
Figure 9.1 shows examples of such transformations applied to an image of a cat.
For medical images of soft tissue, data augmentation could also include continuous
‘rubber sheet’ deformations (Ronneberger, Fischer, and Brox, 2015).
For sequential training algorithms, such as stochastic gradient descent, the data
set can be augmented by transforming each input data point before it is presented
to the model so that, if the data points are being recycled, a different transformation
(drawn from an appropriate distribution) is applied each time. For batch methods, a
similar effect can be achieved by replicating each data point a number of times and
transforming each copy independently.
We can analyse the effect of using augmented data by considering transformations that represent small changes to the original examples and then making a Taylor
expansion of the error function in powers of the magnitude of the transformation
(Bishop, 1995c; Leen, 1995; Bishop, 2006). This leads to a regularized error function in which the regularizer penalizes the gradient of the network output with respect

9.1. Inductive Bias

Exercise 9.2

Chapter 10

259

to the input variables projected onto the direction of transformation. This is related
to the technique of tangent propagation discussed above. A special case arises when
the transformation of the input variables consists simply of the addition of random
noise, in which case the regularizer penalizes the derivatives of the network outputs
with respect to the inputs. Again, this is intuitively reasonable, since we are encouraging the network outputs to remain unchanged despite the addition of noise to the
input variables.
Finally, approach 4, in which we build invariances into the structure of the network, has proven to be very powerful and effective and leads to other key benefits.
We will discuss this approach at length in the context of convolutional neural networks for computer vision.

9.1.4

Equivariance

An important generalization of invariance is called equivariance in which the
output of the network, instead of remaining constant when the input is transformed,
is itself transformed in a specific way. For example, consider a network that takes
an image as input and returns a segmentation of that image in which each pixel
is classified as belonging either to a foreground object or to the background. In
this case, if the location of the object within the image is translated, we want the
corresponding segmentation of the object to be similarly translated. Suppose we
denote the image by I, and the operation of the segmentation network by S, then for
a translation operation T we have
S(T (I)) = T (S(I)),

(9.2)

which says that the segmentation of the translated image is given by the translation
of the segmentation of the original image. This is illustrated in Figure 9.2
More generally, equivariance can hold if the transformation applied to the output
is different to that applied to the input:
S(T (I)) = Te (S(I)).

(9.3)

For example, if the segmented image has a lower resolution than the original image,
then if T is a translation in the original image space, Te represents the corresponding
translation in the lower-dimensional segmentation space. Similarly, if S is an operator that measures the orientation of an object within an image, and T represents a
rotation (which is a complex nonlinear transformation of all of the pixel values in the
image) then Te will increment or decrement the scalar orientation value generated by
S.
We also see that invariance is a special case of equivariance in which the output
transformation is simply the identity. For example, if C is a neural network that
classifies an object within an image and T is a translation operator then
C(T (I)) = C(I),

(9.4)

which says that the class of the object does not depend on its position within the
image.

260

9. REGULARIZATION
Figure 9.2

Illustration of equivariance, corresponding to (9.2). If an image
(a) is first translated to give (b)
and then segmented to give (d),
the result is the same as if the
image is first segmented to give
(c) and then translated to give
(d).

T

(a)

(b)

S

S

T

(c)

(d)

9.2. Weight Decay
Section 1.2.5

Section 2.6.2

Exercise 9.3

We introduced regularization in the context of linear regression to control model
complexity, as an alternative to limiting the number of parameters in the model. The
simplest regularizer comprises the sum of the squares of the model parameters to
give a regularized error function of the form (9.1), which penalizes parameter values
with large magnitude. The effective model complexity is then determined by the
choice of the regularization coefficient λ.
We have also seen that this additive regularization term can be interpreted as
the negative logarithm of a zero-mean Gaussian prior distribution over the weight
vector w. This provides a probabilistic perspective on the inclusion of prior knowledge into the model training process. Unfortunately, this prior is expressed over the
model parameters, whereas any domain knowledge we might possess regarding the
problem to be solved is more likely to be expressed in terms of the network function
from inputs to outputs. The relationship between the parameters and the network
function is, however, extremely complex, and therefore only very limited kinds of
prior knowledge can easily be expressed directly as priors over model parameters.
The sum-of-squares regularizer in (9.1) is known in the machine learning literature as weight decay because in sequential learning algorithms, it encourages weight
values to decay towards zero, unless supported by the data. One advantage of this
kind of regularizer is that it is trivial to evaluate its derivatives for use in gradient
descent training. Specifically for (9.1) the gradient is given by
e
∇E(w)
= ∇E(w) + λw.

(9.5)

9.2. Weight Decay

261

u2
w2

E(w)

w?

u1

b
w
E(w) + λ(w12 + w22 )

w1
w12 + w22

Figure 9.3 Contours of the error function (red), the regularization term (green), and a linear combination of
the two (blue) for a quadratic error function and a sum-of-squares regularizer λ(w12 + w22 ). Here the axes in
parameter space have been rotated to align with the axes of the elliptical contour of the unregularized error
function. For λ = 0, the minimum error is indicated by w? . When λ > 0, the minimum of the regularized error
function E(w) + λ(w12 + w22 ) is shifted towards the origin. This shift is greater in the direction of w1 because
the unregularized error is relatively insensitive to the parameter value, and less in direction w2 where the error is
more strongly dependent on the parameter value. The regularization term is effectively suppressing parameters
that have only a small effect on the accuracy of the network predictions.

Section 4.1.2
Section 8.1.6

We see that the factor of 1/2 in (9.1), which is often included by convention, disappears when we take the derivative.
The general effect of a quadratic regularizer can be seen by considering a twodimensional parameter space along with an unregularized error function E(w) that
is a quadratic function of w (corresponding to a simple linear regression model with
a sum-of-squares error function), as illustrated in Figure 9.3. The axes in parameter space have been rotated to align with the eigenvectors of the Hessian matrix,
corresponding to the axes of the elliptical error function contours. We see that the
effect of the regularization term is to shrink the magnitudes of the weight parameters.
However, the effect is much larger for parameter w1 because the unregularized error
is much less sensitive to the value of w1 compared to that of w2 . Intuitively only
the parameter w2 is ‘active’ because the output is relatively insensitive to w1 , and
hence the regularizer pushes w1 close to zero. The effective number of parameters
is the number that remain active after regularization, and this concept can be formalized either from a Bayesian or from a frequentist perspective (Bishop, 2006; Hastie,
Tibshirani, and Friedman, 2009). For λ → ∞, all the parameters are driven to zero
and the effective number of parameters is then zero. As λ is reduced, the number
of parameters increases until for λ = 0 it equals the total number of actual param-

262

9. REGULARIZATION
eters in the model. We see that controlling model complexity by regularization has
similarities to controlling model complexity by limiting the number of parameters.

9.2.1

Consistent regularizers

One of the limitations of simple weight decay in the form (9.1) is that it breaks
certain desirable transformation properties of network mappings. To illustrate this,
consider a multilayer perceptron network having two layers of weights and linear
output units that performs a mapping from a set of input variables {xi } to a set of
output variables {yk }. The activations of the hidden units in the first hidden layer
take the form
!
X
wji xi + wj 0
(9.6)
zj = h
i

whereas the activations of the output units are given by
X
yk =
wkj zj + wk0 .

(9.7)

j

Suppose we perform a linear transformation of the input data:
xi → x
ei = axi + b.

Exercise 9.4

(9.8)

Then we can arrange for the mapping performed by the network to be unchanged
by making a corresponding linear transformation of the weights and biases from the
inputs to the units in the hidden layer:
wji → w
e ji =

1
wji
a

wj 0 → w
e j 0 = wj 0 −

(9.9)
bX
wji .
a i

(9.10)

Similarly, a linear transformation of the output variables of the network of the form
yk → e
yk = cyk + d

(9.11)

can be achieved transforming the second-layer weights and biases using
wkj → w
e kj = cwkj
wk 0 → w
e k0 = cwk0 + d.

(9.12)
(9.13)

If we train one network using the original data and one network using data for which
the input and/or target variables have been transformed by one of the above linear
transformations, then consistency requires that we should obtain equivalent networks
that differ only by the linear transformation of the weights as given. Any regularizer
should be consistent with this property, otherwise it would arbitrarily favour one
solution over another, equivalent one. Clearly, simple weight decay (9.1), which
treats all weights and biases on an equal footing, does not satisfy this property.

9.2. Weight Decay

263

We therefore look for a regularizer that is invariant under the linear transformations (9.9), (9.10), (9.12), and (9.13). These require that the regularizer should be
invariant to re-scaling of the weights and to shifts of the biases. Such a regularizer is
given by
λ 1 X 2 λ2 X 2
w +
w
(9.14)
2
2
w∈W1

w∈W2

where W1 denotes the set of weights in the first layer, W2 denotes the set of weights
in the second layer, and biases are excluded from the summations. This regularizer
will remain unchanged under the weight transformations provided the regularization
parameters are re-scaled using λ1 → a1/2 λ1 and λ2 → c−1/2 λ2 .
The regularizer (9.14) corresponds to a prior distribution over the parameters of
the form:
!
α1 X 2 α2 X 2
w −
w .
(9.15)
p(w|α1 , α2 ) ∝ exp −
2
2
w∈W1

w∈W2

Note that priors of this form are improper (they cannot be normalized) because the
bias parameters are unconstrained. Using improper priors can lead to difficulties in
selecting regularization coefficients and in model comparison within the Bayesian
framework. It is therefore common to include separate priors for the biases (which
then break the shift invariance) that have their own hyperparameters.
We can illustrate the effect of the resulting four hyperparameters by drawing
samples from the prior and plotting the corresponding network functions, as shown
in Figure 9.4. The priors are governed by four hyperparameters, α1b , α1w , α2b , and α2w ,
which represent the precisions of the Gaussian distributions of the first-layer biases,
first-layer weights, second-layer biases, and second-layer weights, respectively. We
see that the parameter α2w governs the vertical scale of the functions (note the different vertical axis ranges on the top two diagrams), α1w governs the horizontal scale
of variations in the function values, and α1b governs the horizontal range over which
variations occur. The parameter α2b , whose effect is not illustrated here, governs the
range of the vertical offsets of the functions
More generally, we can consider regularizers in which the weights are divided
into any number of groups Wk so that
Ω(w) =

1X
αk kwk2k
2

(9.16)

k

where
kwk2k =

X

wj2 .

(9.17)

j∈Wk

For example, we could use a different regularizer for each layer in a multilayer network.

